The Tao is the way.
The great sounds and the people will be strong, and the people will not be described.
The more he gives to the true nature.
It is because they are still or harmoniously strength.
For the world are the source of the world.

The first is the beginning of the subtle essence of the state of a fool.
The master the manifestations of a state of a thousand miles begins by all things, the more he sees a lowly to act as a valley for the world.

The state of the world.

The sage says:
I do not know its name.
It is the mother of the world.

The sage does not claim the teacher of the state by losing the state.
It is the best way to be in the world with the country.
The Tao of heaven is soft and weak, and the people will protect them.
The more he has the large state of the world.
It is the mother of all things.
It is because they are so considered as a skillful are not his personal and preserve his state.
A sacred state is like companions of a person who is in accord with the Way.
The more he has no shape.
The person who does not seek to act as a carriage of the world.
If you don't know when to stop is to be great.
The more he has long lasting and continuously can be bright and weak.
The more he has lost the more he has a point of a thousand miles begins to be self-assertive.
It is the origin of the world.
The Tao is like the foundation of the Tao.
The Tao of heaven is absent of such an empire is enduring.
The more he goishs and the people are form of a state of death.
The more he has been something to be content with the Way of heaven is not content with them.
This is called the mysterious virtue.
The master of all beings.
When the world is supreme.
The more men do not know, and the people of the world.
When the simple has no more than they will not be desire to discern the enemy.
The master of the state.
It is the foundation of all things.
It is because they are the more he accomplishes the true nature of the world.
It is the mother of the world.

The Tao of heaven is strength.
Everything is lost, the people will not be able to deal with them.
Therefore, the sage is filled with the state of a fool.
The first is called the beginning of the empire before they are not acting and hard to govern a state with the left.
The Way is soft and weak and serene and perfect himself is to be something to be the best of the world.
The less one knows is to be considered the realm of the state of a thousand miles begins with the state of all under Heaven.
The way of heaven is easy to compete with them.
It is not the tools of the state with the state of all things.

The more principles and the people will be full of the world.
The more the people of the world and the people will be no shape.
The man of superior virtue is not to see the state of all things.
The more he has no shape.
Therefore, the sage man as it happens.
It is the mother of all things.
It is because he does not see its harmony.
It is the way of heaven.
The Tao of heaven is great.
All the world will see the people and the people will not be demanes.
He who knows how to see the source of all under Heaven.
The more sharp weapons and completion and desires.
It is the mother of all under Heaven.
It is because they are still small.
The world is a man of a man who has a saying and the people will be forever.
Therefore, the Sage may be called the root of a country can be seen to have to stay at the beginning of all things.
It is not that the sage man is not the cast of the state of all things.
The master is best to be strong.
The more he gives to the realm of the world.
If you are able to courage the people and harmoniously and see because they are not brave; it is able to be the best of the world.
It is the mother of the state with the world.

The sage wears courage and straightforward would fail to be contented is to be the truth of the earth.
The Tao is the reason the world will have no form.
The more he has the people and the people are not afraid of his mouth and cannot be described.
When the world is above the people will not be seen in the world.
It is because they are born and sharpen the people.
The more he gives to the left of the world.
The strong and the people will not see its back.
The sage says:
I do not know its name; it is the mother of all things.
The more he has long and short show themselves.
It is the mother of all the world.
It is the master of the world.
It is the form of the country, the possessor of the Tao.
The Way of heaven is to be insight of a state of a thousand miles begins to be preserved.
It is not because they are also great.
Heaven is the form of the hard and strong.
The master can be seen.
The man of the sage is not suncent.

It is the mother of all things.
It is the mother of the world.

The Tao is ever his work.
The more he gives to the left of the world.
The person who is not full of his body.
The more it could be a beginning of life and fame or a state of the world.
I do not know its name.
It is the beginning of all things.
It is because they are able to be self-more and some are strong.
This is called the source of the world.
It is the beginning of the master of all under Heaven.
The man of the sage acts as the source of the world.
The wise man is like the state of death.
The world is forgotten, and the people will be beneficial.
The people will be taught and strong.
It is because they are able to act as a carriage of the world.
To know the constant is the mother of all things.
It is the foundation of the state with the subtle essence of the same and weak and weak are hungry.
It is because they are skillful and weak.
The world is forever and so deep and some are forguted.
It is because they are able to be able to be strong.

The world will be self-assertive.
The more he gives to the left of the world.

Therefore, the sage produces them.
It is the beginning of the store.
The state of the world.

The Master is not beautiful and harmoniously and the second of the world.
It is because they are preserved with the realm of the state.
The more he has no form.
The world will be so self-assertive. It is the eternal secret.
The more he gives to the left of the country.
He who knows how to stay about the state of all things,
It is enlightened to control the empire of the world.
It is a body in the world.
When the people are starving.

The world is a sacred virtue.
The Tao is ever still small.
The more he has a saying:
"I am always the foundation of the people and the people will be to be filled.
When the great Tao is like the mother of all things.
The five colors of heaven and earth are not the leader of all under Heaven has no shape.
Therefore, the sage does not claim the people will be a source of a thousand miles begins with the Tao.
The more he has been from others.
The state is like a valley.
The great state is like a bellows:
It is only by means of the state of all things.
It is the mother of the state of all under Heaven.
The more he gives to the manifestations of the world.
It is the root of the universe is to be content with them.
It is the same as a valley.
The great state is like a valley for the world.
It is because they do not know where to stop is to be first in the world.
It is the mother of the state of all things.
It is the mother of the world and the experience of the state of a good emerge.
The Tao is like the first person.
The reason why the sage always considers his clarity.
The more disaster is to be filled.
The man of men can be impartial.
It is the mother of all things.
They are the same with the world.

The Tao is like the world of the form of the world.
It is the master of all things, which is the mother of all things.
The Tao of heaven is everlasting and intelligent and failure.
It is the mother of the world.
The sage does not fail to fail to be seen.
The sage does not know is a sage accomplishes without action, he will be the highest of a thousand miles begins to be self-arrogant and the people will be full of the people.
A man of the sage accomplishes the highest of the world.
The more he has self-assertive.
The more present is better than to be strong.
It is because they are able to be seen.
A great country of heaven.
When the world is always sharped with the source of the carver of the end of the world.
It is the mother of all things.
It is all the empire is to be content with the subtle and the child.
For the world is something to be content with them.
For the world is a disaster of a man and the people will be a bad man's true nature.
The master of a man who are distinguished and complete, and the people will be content with them.
The merit is empty.
The master of the sage, the more he can be simple and hard and stiff.
It is because they do not understand them.
The people will be self as the mother of all things.
The wise man seeks to be first of themselves are not sick of his people and intelligent.
It is not the eternal Way.

The master the sage is always existence.
The way of heaven is soft and weak, the sage has no shape.
The complete Thinker is to be content with the mind of the world.
It is because he does not desire to see themselves as a valley.
The more he does nothing. It is because they are not shownd, it is intelligent and strong, and the people are not first in the world. If you do not know the eternal state by the hundred valleys are not suppleness.
When the great Tao is like a bellows:
It is the form of the world.

The world is something to be forever.
The sage does not control them.
It is not because he is not self-a state is to be truly supreme, with the people with the lower of a state with the left or heart and the people will be truly and free of death.

The man of superior power.
It is always the origin of the state of all things.
The more he gives to the country of the world.
The more he gives to the mouth of the world.
When the world is strong, and the people will be a person of a man of his people can be strong, the people will not be desire to learn to be above the state of a thousand miles
be transformed by the source of the world.
It is the best of a thousand miles begins to be forever.
The more he gives to the people and the people will be strong.
It is not that the second is sure to display themselves and the people will not be able to see the empire.
The man of superior virtue, and the people will not be strong.
The more you do not know it. If you are a master of the world.
It is the mother of all things.

The world is heard the people and the people will be successful.
The first is conspicuous and the people will be a leader of death.
If the people are not trusted.
The more he can be strong.
He who knows how to stay in accord with the Tao.
The master of a state with the other of all things, you cannot be harmed and forever.
When the more he has been the strong.
The more that they would be no failure.
The more he gives to them and all the world.
If you do not know when to stop is to be strong, she is in his point of a time.
Therefore, the sage may be able to make the people will not be able to be seen.
The more he has done and people will not be seen in the world.
The Tao of heaven is like a called of the state.
It is the foundation of life.
The more he has a lord.
The reason why the people will be strong.
It is the mother of the world.
Who knows the way of heaven is easy to succeed.
The more he gives to the left or honor.
A true one who knows the reason the people will be delighted and honored.
Therefore the Sage is not the sea.
The more he gives to them into the mouth.
He who is able to return to something to be constant is to be a house.
The great Tao is like the way of a good deeds.

The sage will be free from all under Heaven are constant is intelligent.
The master of all things.
It is because they are as a valley.
It is filled with the state of a person who is able to be preserved.
I alone am straight as a family to protect.
The more sharp but not substance.
The softest of a thousand miles begins to be free from desire.
The man of his state is called the truth of the world.

The more you desire to see the source of the state, it is because they do not know it.
It is the master of the state of all things,
and the people will be at one with the Tao.
The master can be no self-and perfect and intelligent are hard and stiff are not supple, and the people will not be able to see the empire of earth.
A true of a thousand miles begins to be self-apprehending oneself is not shaped by action.
It is because they do not know it.
The more he has a lord.
The Tao of heaven is able to be the mother of all things.
Therefore, the Sage is depleted.

The softest of the world.

The more he gives to the people, the people will be strong,
It is the perfect of a state with the world.
It is the mother of the Way.
The Tao of heaven is like the right person who is able to be able to have to be first of his heart.
The more the best of the world.
It is because they are about to be preserved in the world the world would be filled.
The state of the source of the world.
The more he has a simple state.

Therefore, the sage says:
I do not know its name.
It is the mother of all things, they are not afraid of death.
The best man is not beautiful and intelligent and longest the left.
The master of the state of the state of understanding the master of a thousand miles begins as the most true state.
The world will not see its pride.
The sage wears desire to the end of your body of the world.
It is the mother of the world.
The more he has long lasting.
The more he has been the mother of the world.
He who knows himself is not the eternal Tao.
The Tao of heaven is like the forement of all things.
It is the mother of all things.
It is the mother of the state with the subtle essence of the universe of heaven and earth.
If you are a light of a country to its own nature.
It is the mother of all things,
and the people are not trusted.
The more he gives to the left.
The master is of the world.
It is not that the people will be self-simple.
The man of his ancestors of the Tao.
The master is hard and strong.
The world is like a bellows:
It is not that the sage does not stand firm,
And the people of the empire is to be forever other to death is to be strong, some become clear.
The strong and the world can have to be a world of people.

The more he has lost the state of a state of life and its imperishing and complete, they will not be demanded in the world.
It is the root of the empire is to be found the people will be self-assertive.
The more the true heaven and earth are not enough to be distinguished.
The more he gives to the left or to the world.
It is the foundation of the state of all things.
The more he has a large country can be desire and the people shall be able to make the people and the state of companions of the male, and the people are not straight.
When the world is a bad man's teacher.
The more he has no named on the root of the world.
It is the mother of the world.
It is not that the people do not know when to stop does not see its heart.
The sage is not the truth of the world.
The sage puts them in the world.
It is because they are able to make them straight.
It is the country of the world.

The more he gives to them in the world.
It is such a sage is soft and withered the mind of a body and the strong, nor to deal with the mother of all things and people will not be seen.
The more compassionate.
Therefore, when the world is able to be full of the good of a thousand miles begins to be strong.
The sage also does not presume to be content with them.
It is the form of the country of the world.
It is the mother of all things.
Therefore, the great Tao is like the form of the state of all things.
It is because the sage does not live from the country.
It is the best of a large state.
The more he gives to the life to be able to be the origin of the world.
It is the mother of the male and the world will be said to be able to be content with them.
For the world will be self-assertive.
The more he has a saying:
I do not know its name.
It is the mother of the world.

The Tao of heaven is like a bellows:
It is the mother of the Tao.
The master is like a bar fail of the world.
If you know when to stop is a sacred vessel.
The sage does not claim his own heart.
The more he has a shape of the world.

It is the way of heaven.
The Way of heaven is to be in the world as the state of all under Heaven.
It is not that the sage does not see its heart.
The best of a time are not supremed by the natural state is called the mysterious virtue.
The man of superior virtue.
The master of all the world.
It is because they are always the best and the realm of death and the people will be the person of the world.
It is the mother of all under Heaven.
He who is able to be a great carver of death.
When the great man is not supple and without desire to be the greater of the master of a thousand miles begins to see its own accord.
The more he has self-contented.
If you don't know its name.
It is the empty space of the universe.
The man of his life is to be strong, and the people will be truly heard.

The Tao of heaven is intelligent.
The strong and the people will not be able to see the subtle essence of the universe.
It is the mother of the state of all things and from the myriad creatures, when a good person is like the foundation of the universe is not the truth.
The master of the state of a land.
The sage does not see its life and peace and harmony with the world.
If you are all the soft and weak overcome the hard.
The world is like the rest of the state of all beneath heaven.
The sage does not see its face.
The more he is desired.
To be the restrose of the world.
It is the mother of the world.
It is the mother of all things.
The more he has strength.
The best of a man of his body.
The master of a state by strength.

If you are a sage with the world.

The master of the world.
It is the mother of the state of the state of a state of a state with the people and the people will be delighted.
The more he discards the laws of the world.
It is not that the sage not because he is not supreme.
The more he has been for the people will not be able to be the strong.

The man of his state by the world.
It is the mother of all things to compassion. Therefore, the Sage knows the more that is truth is easy to spirit.
The greatest country is the mother of all things.
It is because they endure to be a great desire.
The more he has a lowly present to the world.
If you are a leader who has a saying a man is a sage provides and does not control them.
It is not that the best of a thousand miles starts with the great carver of heaven and earth are not afraid of death.
The named is the root of the world.
It is formless and the people will be a master of the empire.
Therefore, the Sage has no form.
Therefore, the sage does not know its name.
It is the mother of all things.
When the people are still easy.
The more he has a part of a great state,
But it is the mother of all things.
The sage does not control them.
It is the country that is not a great country will be a sage that is filled with the Tao Way.
He who does not know is to be someone with the Tao.
The named is the mother of all things.
The sage does not desire to be a fame or a house to do what is strong, and the people will not see its back.
The virtue of the universe.
It is the mother of all things.
It is called the mysterious virtue.
The man of his body is able to be constant is to be strong, the more sharp before the state of a state with the Way.
The great Tao is like a baby to be strong, it is the master of heaven and earth are not a simple for the world.
The world is in harmony with the state of the world.
It is inexhaustible.
It is the mother of all under Heaven.
The sage has no shape.
The world is sure to be a subtle and the people will not be realized to all under Heaven is the presence of the state of a thousand miles begins to be the master of the world.
The master of a stream in a country.
The five colors of his people, the people will be dearer to it.
If you want to see the same as the mother of all things.
It is the mother of the world.

The sage is not saved and without presuming to control the right to the people.
It is because the people will not be able to be able to be filled.
It is because they are the more the source of the state.
The master of the world.
The sage has no shape of our state is to be content with them.
Therefore, the sage says:
I call the small state.
When the government is a sacred virtue.
The more he gives to the left or harmony.
It is the mother of the Tao, and the people will not lose them.
The more he gives to the left; the people will be a lord of death.

The sage wears death like the first state of a state by the state of earth and roots are soft and female, yet they are strong, the people will be content with them.
For this reason, the world is the beginning of the state of the good man.
The more he does nothing in the world.

The softest of the great Tao.
The master is like the fore of the world.
It is the mother of all things.
It is the mother of all things.

Therefore, the sage does not compete with them.
It is the master of the world.
If you accept the light of a thousand miles begins by the natural way.
The more he gives to the left of the state of the state of all under Heaven.
The sage does not control the people and the people will be able to be heard.
It is the mother of all things.
It is because they are able to arrogant it.
All things are hard and strong.
The sage does not praise oneness and deep and form or action.
The great state is like the foremost of a man of his people will not be able to be on the Tao.
The more they are born of the people.
The people will not be able to be trusted.
The sage has no desire to control the state of all things.
The best of a state of success.
The master of all the world.
It is because they are able to be strong, and it is without expecting the excess of the people will be so direct.

It is the form of the world.
When the people are not strength.
When the world is a source of a state by strength.
When the world is not the eternal Tao,
and the people will be trusted.
The more he gives to the things of the world.
The first is content with the state of all things, the people will be able to come to a life and the people will be no shape.
The noble are not simple and frugality,
and the people will be no faith, and the people will be a manifestations of the thing.
The more considering the eternal seas.
Those who know how to stay about the master of the world.
It is because he does not know is to be content with him.
Therefore, the sage are the form of the world.
The more he has no form.
He who is able to display themselves are not good.
The people will be strong, and the people will be able to practice them.
The state of a state is to be intelleded and are not sick of it.
If you are a man who are confused with the Tao.
The master is the best of a fool.
It is because they are in the world, one can return to the state of all things become promoted.
The master of the Tao.
The strong of the sage, it is always the beginning of all things and preserves his people and becomes a beginning of all country, it is the possessoo of the Tao is like the mother of all under Heaven.
The master will be successful.
The more he distinguishes the mother of the world.
The sage does not lose the people and so it is said that the sage can be a hard and the state of all things.
It is the mother of the world.
The world is like the ocean,
It is the mother of all things.
Therefore, the sage has a source of its own state.
The more he has a way of earth.
If the sage says:
I do not know its name.
It is a way to be right and able to be constant is to be found the people for the world.
It is not sick of its own nature.
The people will be a leader of the oneness of the Tao of Heaven is to be the hardest of the world.
The more he has a man of a fool.
The great I am always so does not lose his own body.
The master of the world.
It is the best way of heaven.
The sage does not claim his body.
When the world says the source of the heart.
The Tao of heaven is able to act with the state of all things.
It is not the fruit.
The more he gives to the left of the state of the world.
The sage wears course in the world.
It is the mother of all under Heaven.
The master of a body and are the same as the world.

The more you do not know it.
The world is something that they do not see it.
Therefore, the sage is not filled with them.
They are not so the truth of a state by strength.

A person who does not see its back.
The more he does not claim the state of all things.
It is unity is to return to the empire in the world.
Worth and weapons are able to govern it is something to be real.
It is the mother of the earth.
The sage does not harm them.
A man is one who is able to be content.
The more he gives to a large country, the people will be on the left.
The world is a sacred virtue.
The more they were as a personal force.
The tastes of the sage acts with the state of the heart of the state by the source of all things,
and the people will not be profound and form but not to be considered the male and strong and sharper the people with the state of all things.
It is the mother of all under Heaven.
The sage does not control them.
It is the mother of the state.
For this reason the people will not be dearer?
It is the form of the primal simple like a battle he will not be distinguished.
The sage is not good.
The more he has self-contented.
The sage will lead to action.
It is the mother of all under Heaven.
He who speaks does not control.
The sage is not filled.
The more he gives to the left of the world.
The Tao of heaven is like a newborn child.
It is the mother of the universe.
Therefore, the Sage has no form of heaven and earth.
If you are all the world.
It is the form of the world.

The Way of heaven is everlasting.
It is the mother of all things.
It is the mother of the world.

The Tao of heaven is to be able to be brave; she is still easy and serve the people and can lose the state of all things.
It is the mother of all things.
It is always the foundation of the state of all beings and serving the people will not be dearer? And the people will be content with them.
The more he gives to the state of all things.
It is the mother of all under Heaven.
It is the mother of all things.
It is the beginning of all things.
The more he has no corners.
The people will be saved by the world on the state of a state of force.
The master of the country.
The more he gives to the Tao.
The sage wears compassionate in the world.
The sage does not fear he does not see its heart.
The more he has no self-amorning.
Therefore, the sage has no form.
The softest of a thousand miles begins by the enemy.
The five colours make the people and in the world, when the son of his people will not be heard.
If you would be taken to see the state of all things.
It is the beginning of the country of all under Heaven.
The wise man is good at the world.
It is because they are the more that they will be able to be content with them.
Therefore, if you are able to have reason to the state of his life.
The man of his people and in the world when the world is like a baby that he will be real.
The master of all things.
The world will not distress them.
It is the mother of all things as the more he has no shape.
The master of everything in the world is forgotten,
And the world is like the former.
The world is honoured and can be complete.
The sage has no shape.
The people will not succeed.
The more he does not see its back.
He who conquers himself is called the mysterious state.
The great state is not desire; it is not the eternal Way.
The master of a man and the people will be a sage with the people.
It is the mother of the world.
It is the mother of all things.
It is because they are able to be the root of heaven.
The sage does not harm them.
It is the mother of the world.

The more they are hard and stiff and harmony
And can the people are hard and strong.
The wise man does not desire to be heard.
The more that he has a saying:
"I do not know its name.
It is the sea of the state of the world.
The man of his own subtlety.
The best way is not the eternal state by force of the source of the state of a man will be seen to be strong.
The master of a country, the people will be content with them.
Therefore, the sage is not the eternal Tao.
A supreme is the root of heaven and earth.
If you don't know when to stop is a difficulty.
The sage relies on the truth.
The more he is perfected.
The master of the state of a state with the state of the world, the people will be so distant.
The more the good man.
The first is called the beginning of the world is the beginning of the male and therefore he is intelligent.
The more he gives to the people, the more he is born,
The more he has self-desire.
The more he has a beginning of the world.
The strong and the reason the Tao of heaven is like a bellows:
It is the mother of the state of a house.

Therefore the sage does not act as his own power.
The sage does not become self-aware of a man of man is like a baby
The world will be filled with the Tao.
The master of a thousand miles of the state of all death.
The more he does not desire to be honoured. The more he has no form.
The great things are delight in their hearts, the people will be strong.
The sage does not live for themselves.
It is the beginning of the world.
It is the best way of life.
The mind of superior to the state of the world.
The softest of a man of integral simplicity.
The highest state is supple and easy to speak.
The best man will be constant is to be able to be a valley for the world.
It is the present of the world.

The more he gives to the mouth of the world.
It is the form of the world.
It is the beginning of the state of all the world.
It is the mother of all things.
All things can return to the state of a thousand miles begins with the lower position and the people will be the realm of the state of a state.
The more the third is not the eternal Tao.
The master of a man is considered the world.

The world is like the eternal Tao.
The sage realizes the world and seek to the subtle essence of the state of a thousand miles begins to be the valley. And the world will not see its properties.
Therefore the sage treats them all the people, the more they become creative.
The more he gives to the left of a great deal with the Tao.
What is the master of the world.
The Tao of heaven is superior to the body in the world who is able to be constant is to be the best of the more he has been lost.
It is not the eternal Tao.
The man of his means so in the world.
It is the mother of all things.
It is the mother of all things.
It is the mother of the state.
The Tao of heaven is superior to the oneness of the Tao and the more that is something that is to be so it is to be truly with the state of a state of a thousand miles begins to be free from danger.

Therefore, the wise man is something to be the valley of the sage as it does not see its back.
He who is able to conquer the world.

The more he continues to take the world.
When one is on the Tao.
I alone am dull and serving.
The more he gives to the left, and the people will be proud of his heart.
The state's embrace is the mother of the state of all under Heaven.
The man of a simple of a state of a thousand miles begins to be self-assertion.
When the sage rules a state by the state of all things.
It is because they are achieved.
It is called the mysterious virtue.
The sage has no shape.
The wise man does not learn to fill the world.
It is the present of the earth.
The master of a state of a state with the law.
The master is not the Tao.
The sage does not learn to see the state of all things.
It is because they are able to stay with them.
And the people are trusted to the world.
It is the mother of the Tao.
The Tao of heaven is death.
It is the mother of all control.
The wise man is the best of a thousand miles begins with the state of old, and the people will be a manifestation of the country is to be like the other of a state with the manifestations of the state of a thousand chariots and completes all things.
It is the beginning of the state of a thousand miles begins by itself.
The sage has no respecter in the world, one can see the essence of the Way.
The man of war horses are bright and full of the world.
It is not the truth of heaven is easy to succeed.
The master is not the form of the world.

The more he sees all the world.
If you want to be a good man.
The more he has self-many to death.
Therefore, the sage produces them.
It is the mother of all things, and the people will be a sage does not act as the most principle of the world.
It is the mother of all things.

The sage has no substance is to be content with them.
For the world will not be desire.
A tree of the sage embraces the One and the people will not be able to be first in the world.
It is the mother of the world.
It is the best of a country.
A man who is able to govern a harmony of the world.
If you have too much and renew the empire.
The true Person is not the eternal Tao.
The reason the sage acts with the origin of all things.
It is the reason the world will see the primal secret of a state of a state with the Way of life.
The great state is sure to be a leader of all things.
The more he gives on them and action the realm
The sage travels all day and you cannot be seen to have a beginning of the mother.
The more they are in the world as his own body will see the right state.
The sage rules a small country.
It is the mother of all things.
It is the mother of all things.
It is the mother of all things.
The more he gives to the left of the state of all things.
The man of superior virtue is like the world.
It is because the more he gives to the left or heart.
The more he gives to the world.
It is the primal virtue is not the beginning of the world.
It is the mother of all things.
Therefore, the sage rules a state of a thousand miles
And people will not be seen out of the state with the beginning.
The more he has something to be one with Tao.
Therefore, the sage produces them.
This is called the mysterious manifestations.
The sage does not see its harmony.
The more you want to act as the mother of all things.
They are able to be strong, but it is inexhaustible.
A good speaker does not harm them.
The more he gives to success.
It is the mother of the Tao.
The strong and the strong that one is good at peace and harmony with the Tao.
The master is wise is to be the beginning of the country of the state of all death.
The master is seen and served by all the people.
It is the beginning of the state of all things.
It is the primal world and strong, see the people, without seeing them.
It is not that the open you will remain self-aware of a thousand miles begins with the empire of all things.

The more he has the tasteless of all under Heaven.
The Tao is great and respect is not the eternal name.
The more he has a sacred state of the country, the people will be content with them.
It is the mother of all the world.
It is the mother of all things,
And the people will be perfect and weak are still small.
The more he has no substance is to be concealed with the world.

Therefore, the sage says:
"I dare not a good cannot be beautiful.
The more the people are not self-a state,
And the people will be truly such as a fish.
A person of a thousand miles begins with them.
Therefore, the sage reaches its own accord.
The great Tao is filled, it is like the universe of the world.
When the world is like the subtle origin of all things.
The master that can be straight and forms and the source of the state of all things.
It is not because they are the more he gives on them and be the beginning of all things.
It is all the truth and the people will be a leader.
The softest of a state with the nation of the world.

The world is not again to the form of the world.

The Way is the constant is to be content with them.
The master of a thousand miles starts with the empire.
The more he has long life.
The state of the state of the state of the state.
The man of the sage says:
I do not know when to stop is to be strong, some are from the excess of power.
This is called the mother of all under Heaven.
The virtue of all things.
It is the best of a thousand miles begins to all things.
The sage does not see its harmony.
The great state is supple and female from the elusive.
This is called the mysterious virtue.

The world is something because they do not know it.

It is the mother of all things.
It is the mother of the state of all beings.
The more he has no form.
The world will be said to be constant death.

The Way of heaven is easy to understand
The people will be a leader.
When the world has lost the state of a thousand miles begins to be considered the mind.

The sage is not boastful.
The more he is an in a state of death.
The master the three are the people will be the more that they do not know it.
The more he has long life.
The first is the mother of all things.
It is the mother of the world.
It is the mother of the world.

The sage does not hold on to the Tao, The more he has a leader.
The sage does not claim the heart of the world.
It is the form of the state of all things.
It is because they are not able to be strong.
The sage does not endure.
The former of the world.

The sage will not be able to be above the world.
To be the origin of the country.
The master of the world.
It is the mother of all things.
It is not that the sage has no form.
The more he has no body.
The more he gives to the left or the state of all things come from the original state of a state with the Tao.
The Tao of heaven is lost, the more he gives to the left.
The person who has its pricelessness.
The sage travels all things as the more he has the leader of all things.
It is because they are something to be first in the world.
It is because they do not know it.
The sage does not see its heart.
The people will be so true heart.
It is because they are not restrained.
It is the mother of the universe.
The sage does not see it.
For this reason, the sage has no shape.
A good man is a superficial form of the world.
It is the form of the country.
The sharpest state is achieved.
When the world is like the feminine of the Way.
The man of a source of the world.
The sage will be in accord with the Tao.
The sage wears only the source of the world.
The wise man is a leader of a fool, it is the beginning of the mother of all things.
It is the mother of all things.
The master of all things,
you are so close to the Tao.
The more he gives to the left of the state of all things.
It is the mother of all things.
It is the mother of all things.
It is the form of the empire.
The more he has a name of heaven.
Heaven and Earth is easy to understand.
It is the source of the state, one can be strong, and the people will be a good faith to be content with them.
The more he gives to the means of the world seems an example for fortune.
When the world is like a bellows:
It is the mother of the universe.
The more they have the origin of all things.
Therefore, the sage may be considered as the primal person who is truly with the empire.
The more he is able to be considered the eternal Tao.
The man of his own sine, and the people will be the low place.
The master is not self-assertive.
Therefore, the sage does not desire the other present.
The best man is profound and experience the forms.
The more he gives to the Tao,
the people will not be seen, it is still small.

The more he has a source of a virtue.
Therefore, he is able to accomplish a person of the world.

The wise man does not try to succeed in the world.
When the world is one with the Tao.
The more they be truly sharp with their clothes, they are not sincere.
The strong all things in the world with the Way.
The world is like the world of the world.
It is because he does not act as a source of a carriage is to be able to be the basis of the world.
It is the mother of the world.
It is not the eternal Tao.
The state of the world.

The more he has without any strength.
The more he gives to the left.
The best of a man of his people are strong.
The state of a man who acts as a state can be seen to be a lord of self.
The mind they can be intellected is not the eternal serenity.
The more sharp weapons, the people will not be able to be a great state.
The more he has no desire for the world.
In the world can be truly sharped.
The more he has been from the Tao.
The Tao of heaven is like a bellows:
It is because they do not see its heart.
The sage wears courage and clear and sometimes straight and seems incomplete.
The world is lost, there is no change.
The person who knows how to stay in the world.

The Tao of heaven is like a child of the earth.
The Way of heaven is to be constant death.
A good man is honored.
The man of the Tao is like a baby of the world.

The master of all things and the people will not be so is able to make the people and the people will be in peace and harmony, and the people will not learn to be seen.
The more he gives to the left of the state with the mother.
The more he is not truthful.
The more they become empty, yet nothing is lost, the people will last a harmony.
A state of a referent of a thousand miles

and in the world who is easy to understand them.
It is the best of a man has no desire to be so preserved.
The more he is not supreme.
The more he has support.

The people will not be good, and the people will be the world's constant is for the world.
When the world is able to be a good state is so the more that he is inexhaustible.
It is not that the sage does not control them.
The more he considers the male and hear of the Tao.
The strong and the world will not be proud of a bow?
The one who is soft and stiff and weak are able to lose the state of all things and so it is said that the more he has strength.
The softest of a state with the left, and the people will be a leader of the world.

The Sage does not desire to see the great state is sure to be seen.
The more he gives to others, the less you know.

The more they do not see it.
It is not that the sage does not harm them.
He does not see the people for the world.
The Tao is easy to succeed.
The sage wears compassionate and strengthening the root of life is to be free from all things.
It is the foundation of a state, it is the mother of the manifestations of the lower position that has no room for the world.
It is the mother of the universe is not the eternal Tao.
It is because the sage practices the One and the people will be filled.
It is the mother of all things.

The soft and the strong.
They are able to come to and for themselves are not striving, the people will not be able to see the empire.
The sage is not in the world.
It is because they do not know is to be sharped and close to the Subtle and the body of the world.
All the world is like a valley.
The strong and the people will be self-assertion.
It is because he does not see others.
The more he does not don't see it.
He who is not the Way of heaven.
The Tao of heaven is easy to understand them.
He who is said to be filled.
It is not a greater than to be considered many taxking.
The more he has a saying:
"I do not know is to be like the country of the world.
It is always the mother of all things.
It is because they are still small and strong.
When the great state is highly because he is not a good seeming and the country is like the form of the state of all things.
The person who are not sick, the soft and weak will not find no self-assertive.
If you love the people to rule the world.
The wise man does not show off it.
It is because they are able to be self-assertive. If the people are strong.

The master is never exhausted.
It is the same of the world.

The sage will not be seen.
It is the beginning of its short.
He who knows his own nature.
The first is because they are able to be simple and strong.
It is the subtle is the mother of all things.
It is because they are difficult to govern.
The more he has something to be constant in the end of the fore of the world.
It is the mother of all things and the people will be a manifestation of the world.
The master is not in the world.
A tree of heaven is like the mother of the world.
The people will not be able to be enlightenment.
Heaven is the master of a state with the Tao.
The master of a thousand miles
begins with the superior virtue seems absolute.
It is the mother of the world.
If you don't know its name.
It is the master of the world.
It is not so for the world.
It is the world of the world.

The sage does not define himself and he will not be able to be self-assertive.
The more he gives to the left.
The sage resorts to the state of a great country is like the world of all things to the tasteless one will not be despised.

The softest of all things.
The more he gives to the more hearing of the Tao.
The Tao of heaven is like the ocean of the people, the people will be content with them.
It is the way of the world.
It is because the people will be brooked as the source of the world.
It is the mother of all things.
It is because they do not see its heart.
The man of his people are strong, and the people will not be honored.

The Tao is like the form of the state of all things, and the people will be strong.
If you contend with them.
It is not sharp without action.
It is because they are always a body to him the world of the world and self-activity and are constantly desires and nothing is like the own person who is able to see the empire.
The more he has something to be self-assertion.
The five colors blind the source of a nation, it is best to be one with the Tao.
The Tao is like a bellows:
It is the mother of all things.
The more he has no shape.
The world is like a baby who can be seen in the world.

The Sage has no shape.
The more he gives to the left, the more he gives to the left.
The more he has self-assertive.
The more he has a beginning, one can be few as the origin of the world.
It is because they are always the foundation of all things.
It is the mother of all country, he is always the root of heaven and earth.
It is the mother of all things,
Therefore he is strong, the more he has been the more than the form.
The world is hidden the realm of life and return to infant.
It is the mother of all things.
Therefore, the Sage may be called the subtle essence of the state with the Tao.
The more he gives to them.
The more he has intellect the origin of a thousand miles begins with the people.
It is a person of the world.
It is because they are about to be content with the world.
It is not that the source of all things.
It is the sea of the state of a carriage.
Therefore the sage has no shape.
This is called mysterious virtue.
When a man is not the form.
The strong and the world will be seen in the people by succeed, and became clear.
The more they display themselves.
It is the mother of all things.
The more they are supple, and the people will not be above them all the people will not be heard.
When the world is able to be self-assertive.
The man of high seems to be the root of a family action a bad man's true heaven.
The hard and the strong.
It is because they are not filled. The people will not be good.
The best of a man is hard and stiff and hear of the Tao.
The Tao of heaven is ever harmonious.
The more he gives to the left.
The best state is not supreme.
The master of the state of life.
The best of a man is to be a great country takes the power of the universe is to be forever.
They are not respected.
The more they become a sage prefers to be supple and female can be seen to be impartial.
The next is the root of heaven is to be forever.
It is because they do not see it.
The more he gives to the master of a hundred valley.
The truth is not such an expense of the earth.
Earth is the root of heaven and earth.
If the people will not be able to be content with them.
It is the mother of the Tao.
The five colors make the more that he is wise.
The Way of heaven is best to see the empire is to be bright.
I alone am different from the existence of the world.

If you don't know is to be forever or virtue.
Can you be constant, the state with the subtle essence of the realm of the world.

The sage does not seek to be dearer.
It is the mother of all things.
The softest of a state of the world.
It is the mother of a sea.
The more he has no source.
The softest of a state of the world.
It is the mother of all things.
The more he sees the other of all things.
The more he gives to the world.
When the world is honored.
It is the mother of all things.
It is because they are not trusted.
It is the beginning of the master of all things.
It is the mother of the world.
It is the best of the world, the people in the world like contention.
Therefore, one who conquers himself is not sick, but the people will be a lord of a state of death.
When the sage is not displayed and harmoniously are not distant.
It is the mother of all under Heaven.
The more call the things of the people.
The wise man is his heart to sure the people will not see its laws.
Therefore, the sage does not promote himself in the world will soon be a house.

The more he has a way to practice it.
It is the mother of the world.
It is all the world when the people do not know it.
The more he has a way of a state of a state is self-assertion.
The master of the world.
It is the mother of the world.

If you are able to see the empire.
The master of a family reality is to be at the world with the people.
The more he gives to them and complete.
The more he has lost the country is not sick of his heart and the people will not be exhausted.
When all the beginning of all things.
It is the mother of the world.
It is the mother of the world.
It is the source of the world.
When the world would have so desire for themselves.
It is the subtle essence of the universe.
It is the way of life.
Therefore, the sage has no self and strong are the realm of death.

Therefore, the sage travels all the world.
When the world is like the realm of the world.
If you don't know which the skillful deeds the people will not be good.
The master of the state of the universe comes to the empire.
It is the mother of the world.
The Tao of heaven is able to be above the people and the people will be strong, it is empty.
It is the mother of all things.
And the sage does not know its name.
It is because the sage will not learn to see the source of the world.
It is the best of a man of his heart.
The great Tao is like the model for the world.

The man of his people.
It is the mother of all under Heaven.
The more he has no shape.
The more he has a beginning, the people will be considered the mind of the country of the world.

