1

Dao that can be expressed in words is not the absolute Dao.
The names that can be given are not the absolute names.
Non-being is before the dawn of time,
Being is when everything begins to emerge.
Therefore, maintaining a passive and receptive mode,
You can watch the secret of life;
Maintaining an active and attentive mode,
You can perceive the rhythm of life.
These two cognitive processes, though differing in names,
Are in the same continuum.
Both are known as the inscrutable Mystery,
Which is the greatest of all mysteries.
And it is through these perspectives that we can observe the marvellous phenomena of Nature.

up

2

When everyone knows what beauty is,
There must also be ugliness.
When everybody knows what goodness is,
Then evil must also exist.
Therefore, the haves and the have-nots coexist.
Easy and hard become complementary.
Long and short differ in length.
High and low contrast in height.
Tone and pitch harmonise with each other.
The past is followed by the present.
Hence, the sage manages his affairs with non-action,
Teaches without utterance,
And lets everything develop without any interference.
Dao procreates but does not possess.
It facilitates development but does not gloat.
When it accomplishes his task, it does not claim credit.
As the sage does not claim credit for his success,
The credit cannot be taken away from him.

up

3

Do not venerate the intelligentsia,
So that people will not rival.
Do not value rare objects,
So that people will not steal.
Do not display any desirable goods,
So that people will not be tempted.
Therefore, the sage rules the people by
Emptying their hearts, filling their stomachs,
Diminishing their desires and strengthening their bones.
He constantly makes people devoid of cunning and ambition,
So much so that even a rabid rabble-rouser among them
Is not able to stir up any trouble.
By practising non-action,
The rule will be peaceful.

up

4

Dao is akin to an empty vessel.
It is inexhaustible, as if the vessel can never be filled completely.
So deep and unfathomable,
It must be from where all things come forth.
Dao blunts its own sharpness,
Simplifies its own complexity,
Attenuates its own brilliance,
And mingles with the dirt.
Vast and profound, it appears that it could go on forever.
I do not know whose progeny it is.
It was there before the existence of the creator.

up

5

Nature is impartial;
It treats everything like sacrificial straw dogs.
The sage is also indifferent;
He regards everyone as sacrificial straw dogs.
The universe is just like a bellows.
Though empty and intangible, it is never spent.
The more you use it, the more briskly it carries on.
But to argue excessively will definitely come to a dead end.
It is best to maintain the central core of human nature.

up

6

The spirit of the valley (Dao) is immortal.
It is known as the mystical female.
The birth canal of the mystical female
Opens to the universe.
Dao seems to be able to go on forever and continues to function effortlessly.

up

7

The universe is everlasting.
It is eternal because it does not exist for its own sake.
Hence, it will be everlasting.
The sage safeguards his interest by always putting his personal interests last.
He regards his interests as inconsequential.
Yet, it is often preserved.
Is this because by not being self-serving that his interests are always preserved?

up

8

A person of great virtue behaves like water.
Water benefits everything but does not contend.
It resides at the lowest place that everyone loathes.
Thus this characteristic of water bears close resemblance to the typical trait of Dao.
A person of great virtue prefers to live on the lowest ground.
His heart is quiescent and serene.
His dealings with others are based on goodwill.
His utterances are forever sincere.
His rule is orderly and peaceful.
His managerial skills are superb.
His timing is always impeccable.
Because he is not contentious, nobody will ever hold a grudge against him.

up

9

As brimming with pride will often lead to a downfall,
A timely halt is much preferred.
If you continue to hone the blade of a knife,
You will not be able to preserve its sharp edge.
It is impossible to safeguard a house full of treasures forever.
Wealthy people who are arrogantly extravagant,
Inevitably bring calamity upon themselves.
To retire after a successful career is to follow the way of Dao.

up

10

In maintaining congruity of the mind and body,
Can you prevent your attention from wandering?
Can you breathe naturally and relax your entire body
Until it becomes as supple as an infant's?
Can you clear all errant thoughts and maintain an immaculate mind?
Can you rule benevolently by adhering to non-action?
In watching everything evolve and change, are you able to maintain quietude (a typical female trait)?
Can you learn intuitively rather than analytically?
Dao procreates and nourishes everything.
It engenders but does not claim possession.
It achieves but does not claim credit.
It lets things develop but does not exert control.
This is known as "inconspicuous virtue".

up

11

Thirty spokes come together at the hub.
The empty hub houses the axle of the wheel, and this allows the cart to move.
You mould clay to make utensils.
The empty space of the container makes it useful.
While building a house, you put in windows and doors.
The empty space gives us the room to use.
The substantial part creates the space, and thus provides us the benefit.
However, it is in the empty space that the actual utility lies.

up

12

Excessive colours impair your sight.
Excessive noise affects your hearing.
Excessive tastes will dull your taste buds.
Galloping and hunting on horseback will drive you crazy.
Coveting rare objects will impel people to commit crime.
Therefore, the sage aims to satiate the people's hunger.
He does not intend to feast their visual desires.
Hence, he rejects the latter but embraces the former.

up

13

Whether you are exalted or disgraced, you are uneasy.
It is because you are fearful of imminent disaster.
Why should you be uneasy when you are exalted or disgraced?
Being exalted, you feel proud and elated.
In disgrace, you feel shameful and miserable.
Gaining honour, you fear losing it.
Losing honour, you suffer severe humiliation.
This is why you feel terribly uneasy when you are exalted or disgraced.
Why is there a fear of imminent disaster?
The fear exists because you are constantly worrying about when disaster will strike you.
If you can forget about yourself, then there is no fear.
However, if you manage the country with the same consideration as you have for yourself,
Then you can be entrusted for the job.
If you rule the country in the same manner as you love yourself,
You deserve to be the trustee of the nation.

up

14

That which cannot be seen is called Yi.
That which cannot be heard is Xi.
That which cannot be touched is Wei.
All these three qualities can hardly be analysed.
When amalgamated into one,
Its upper limit is not radiant,
And its lower limit is not dull.
It is as nebulous as it is indescribable.
Eventually it approaches to nothingness.
This is why it is called the formless form, or the immaterial material.
This is why it is called the illusory.
Try to meet it head-on, and you cannot see its face.
Try to follow it from behind, and you cannot see its back.
Following the way of ancient Dao,
You will be able to manage your affairs with great aplomb.
To be able to understand ancient Dao
Is to truly appreciate the immutable principles of Dao.

up

15

In antiquity, a person who followed the way of Dao,
Was as enigmatic as he was insightful.
He was also inscrutable.
Because of his inscrutability, I am compelled to describe his demeanour:
He acts cautiously, as if he were wading through a frigid stream in winter.
He conducts his affairs prudently, as if he were fearful of the gossiping of his nosy neighbours.
His behaviour is as majestic and proper as an honoured guest.
His demeanour is as spontaneous as the melting ice.
His character is as unsophisticated as a block of raw timber.
He is as open-minded as a valley.
He is as muddle-headed as a turbid stream.
Who can allow the turbid water to precipitate and gradually become clear?
Who can agitate the stillness and slowly bring vivacity back again?
He who follows the way of Dao does not become swollen-headed.
Consequently, he will endure.

up

16

I strenuously try to banish all errant thoughts from my mind, and assiduously attempt to maintain quietude.
Henceforth, while everything continues to develop and evolve, I silently watch its natural transformation.
Although there are multifarious things in the world,
Each and every one will go back to where it came from.
Returning back to where it came from is called 'jing'.
It is also called 'back to destiny'.
'Back to destiny' is the eternal law.
You have insightful wisdom if you understand this eternal law.
Unable to grasp this will bring about calamity.
Knowing this, you will have great understanding.
Having great understanding will make you impartial.
Being impartial, you generally facilitate others to fulfil their potential. (accomplishment)
Accomplishment is in accordance with the law of nature.
The law of nature is called Dao.
Dao is everlasting.
Following the way of Dao, your whole life will be free from danger.

up

17

People take the great ruler for granted and are oblivious to his presence.
The good ruler is loved and acclaimed by his subjects.
The mediocre ruler is universally feared.
The bad ruler is generally despised;
Because he lacks credibility, the subjects do not trust him.
On the other hand, the great ruler seldom issues orders.
Yet he appears to accomplish everything effortlessly.
To his subjects everything he does is just a natural occurrence.

up

18

When the great Dao is in decline,
Benevolence and loyalty appear.
As wisdom arises, so does hypocrisy.
Only in a feuding family do filial piety and parental doting become conspicuous.
Loyal ministers emerge whenever the country is in chaos.

up

19

If you discard sagacity and wisdom,
The populace will be better off a hundred-fold.
If you get rid of benevolence and righteousness,
Filial piety and doting affection will return.
If you dispense with ingenuity and profiteering,
There will be no thieves.
All these attributes are mere superficialities.
They are not substantial enough to run the country.
There are other ways:
Outwardly, be simple; and inwardly, you should maintain your pristine sincerity.
You should not be selfish or avaricious.

up

20

Get rid of the knowledge and you eliminate your worry.
To say 'yes' or to howl 'yes', is there a big difference?
The concepts of good and bad, are they that much different?
Should I also be afraid of what other people are fearful about?
I am yet to make up my mind on these questions.
Nevertheless, everyone is happy, as if having a great feast or a nice picnic in spring.
Singularly, I am feeling tranquil and imperturbable.
I am as innocently naive as an infant.
Feeling lost as if I have no place to go back to.
Everyone seems to be smug while I alone feel inadequate.
I am just a clod and am very bewildered.
Everyone appears to be dazzling, but I am simply lacklustre.
Everyone is astute while I am befuddled.
My thoughts are drifting and ruffling, like an ocean.
My mind is blowing aimlessly like a gale.
Everyone is striving for success and prosperity
While I remain obstinately inane and insignificant.
I know I am different for I am devoted to the study of Dao.

up

21

The demeanour of a man of great virtue is consistent with the way of Dao.
Dao, as an entity, is not tangible.
Though it is intangible, it appears to have some image.
Although it appears nebulous, it has some form.
Though inscrutable and indistinct, it appears to have some vitality.
This vitality is as real as it is creditable.
From antiquity until now, Dao has always existed.
Through following the way of Dao, one tries to understand the beginning of the world.
To understand the beginning of the universe is from the study of Dao.

up

22

To preserve your life, you have to be pliable.
That which is bent will soon be straightened.
The lowest ground will be filled by water.
Old and tattered things will soon be replaced.
To gain real insights, you must be focused.
Dealing with too many things concurrently can only lead to confusion.
The sage embraces the essence of Dao.
He thus sets an example for others to follow.
Not trying to be prominent is why he is famous.
Not pretending to be a know-all is why he is distinguished.
Not wanting to claim credit is why he is acclaimed.
Not bragging about his ability is why he has advanced.
Because he is not contending, no one can compete with him.
The ancient saying that to be pliable is to preserve oneself is not just empty rhetoric.
It is through following the way of Dao that self-preservation is assured.

up

23

To be reticent is consistent with the law of nature.
Usually the hurricane does not last more than half a day.
And torrential rain does not pour for a whole day.
The wind and rain are the result of the forces of nature.
Even the forces of nature do not endure for long,
So how can human efforts ever match that of nature?
Those devoted to Dao will follow Dao, and those devoted to De will follow De.
On the contrary, those who go against Dao will manifest it in their behaviours.
Following the path of Dao, Dao is glad to accept you.
Following the path of De, De is pleased to welcome you.
Following the alternative path, the alternative entity is also happy to receive you.
If the people in power have no credibility, then the ordinary people will not trust them.

up

24

He who stands tiptoed will soon fall over.
He who walks with huge strides will not go very far.
By trying to show off, you will not be eminent.
By acting like a know-all, you will not be distinguished.
If you brag about your success, you will end up with no credit.
If you are conceited, you will not make any further advancement.
From the perspective of Dao,
Even animals will find all extravagant deeds disgusting.
He who follows the path of Dao does not subscribe to these actions.

up

25

There is an admixture,
Which existed before heaven and earth.
As silent as it is nebulous,
It exists alone and it is permanent.
It moves around a circle unceasingly.
It is the mother of the universe.
I do not know its name and I have decided to call it Dao.
Arbitrarily, I describe it as great.
So great that it begins to permeate everywhere.
Permeating outwards, it goes farther and farther away.
Nevertheless, it will soon return to its original state again.
Therefore, Dao is great.
Heaven is great.
Earth is great.
Humanity is great.
In the universe, humanity is one of the four greats.
Man models earth;
Earth models heaven;
Heaven models Dao.
And Dao models nature.

up

26

Frivolity should be anchored to solemnity.
Tranquillity should keep a tight rein on agitation.
Therefore, the sage carries out his daily tasks with gravity and equanimity.
He is oblivious to the honour that has been bestowed upon him.
Although he lives in luxury, he is unaffected by all the trappings.
How could any national leader behave in a cavalier fashion in governing the country?
In fickle frivolity, he will lose the foundations.
In great haste, he will lose control.

up

27

A good traveller leaves no tracks.
A good debater never makes a slip.
A good strategist does not require chips to formulate a plan.
A good leader does not confine his men to ensure that they stay.
A good employer does not need rope to bind his men to their jobs.
Therefore, the sage always assists but never abandons people.
He always aids all creatures and he never forsakes them.
This is called "covert enlightenment".
While a good person could be a bad person's teacher,
A bad person could provide a salutary lesson to a good person.
A learned person remains a befuddled one if he neither values the teacher nor learns from this salutary lesson.
The subtlety of Dao can only be appreciated by an intuitive mind.

up

28

Knowing the excitement of proactivity, you settle for quietude.
Everyone will converge to you like water flowing towards the valley.
Thus, you are like the valley to the world.
Holding fast to the "absolute virtue" (Dao),
You try to return to the pristine innocence of an infant.
You know the benefit of the limelight, but choose to be anonymous.
You set this example for others to follow.
Holding fast to the "absolute virtue" unerringly,
You hope to return to the path of Dao.
Knowing the lure of fame and glory, you choose humility instead.
By your taking a low profile, everyone converges to you like water flowing towards the ravine.
Thus, you are the ravine to the world.
The "absolute virtue" is bountiful.
Finally, it returns to the naturalness of a raw timber.
The natural block once carved becomes useful utensils.
The sage utilises them as leaders.
The system set up by the sage should cause no harm.

up

29

If you want to rule the world according to your own whims,
It is unlikely to be successful.
Governing a country is a sacred mission.
You must not be meddlesome or intransigent.
He who is meddlesome will flounder in his job.
He who is rigid and foolhardy will lose the plot.
It takes all sorts to make the world.
Some are leaders and some are followers.
Some are highly excitable and some are calm.
Some are strong and some are weak.
Some feel secure and some feel threatened.
Nevertheless, the sage forsakes excess, extravagance and arrogance.

up

30

An enlightened minister prefers applying the principles of Dao to assist his sovereign in governing.
He is extremely reluctant to use force to subjugate others.
Using force always has repercussions.
Wherever the army passes through, the land is laid to waste and brambles grow.
After a major battle, there will be a famine the following year.
A moral person will only accomplish his task.
He will not be heavy-handed.
Achieving success, he is not ostentatious.
Accomplishing his task, he does not gloat.
Scoring victory, he is not arrogantly intransigent.
He goes to war in order to achieve his objective, only when he has no other choice.
Even after winning, he does not brutalise the vanquished.
Whenever anything reaches its peak, it starts to decline.
Moreover, excessive use of force is not in accordance with Dao.
Anything that goes against Dao will suffer an early demise.

up

31

Sharp weapons are inauspicious instruments.
Everyone dislikes them.
Hence, those who follow the way of Dao avoid using them.
In times of peace, a person of virtue favours the left side.
Only during war does the right side become the preferred choice.
A weapon is an instrument of bad omen.
It is never the favourite object of the man of virtue.
Even as the last resort when military force has to be used,
It should be used with great restraint and equanimity.
In victory, one should not glorify the war.
He who glorifies war must be a bloodthirsty person.
No bloodthirsty person has ever won universal respect or approval.
The left side represents good auspices.
The right side augurs bad omen.
The second-in-command resides on the left side, whereas the commander-in-chief resides on the right.
In conducting the war, the mood is as dark and solemn as that of a funeral rite.
During the conflict, you should still mourn for the heavy casualties you have inflicted.
In victory, you should bury the dead with appropriate ceremony.

up

32

Dao is often referred to as "the nameless".
Although this "pristine simplicity" (Dao) appears to be insignificant,
Nothing in the world can subjugate it.
If a ruler can follow the way of Dao,
Everyone will naturally come to join him.
When Yin and Yang harmonise, rain begins to fall.
Similarly, people will live in harmony without any coercion.
Whenever a system is set up, new terminology appears.
(A new system will bring about new disputes.)
However, it is important to simplify the system.
Knowing when to stop, you can avert a calamity.
What Dao is to the people is similar to what the ocean is to the rivers.

up

33

He who understands others is wise.
He who knows himself is sagacious.
To defeat others, you are powerful.
To prevail upon yourself, you are resolute.
To be contented is to be wealthy.
To diligently follow the way of Dao means you have great determination.
By not deviating from the path of Dao, you will perpetuate.
When a person dies but his spirituality persists, this is the essence of immortality.

up

34

The great Dao flows everywhere.
It goes to the right and it goes to the left.
Myriad beings depend on it to survive,
But it does not interfere with them.
It facilitates but does not gloat.
It nourishes everything, but does not exert control.
Dao has no goal and appears to be insignificant.
Nevertheless, everything relies on it for sustenance, but it exerts no control.
Such action seems to be magnificently great.
Dao has no intention to be great, yet it attains greatness.

up

35

When the ruler follows the way of Dao,
People will flock to him.
They become the beneficiaries and enjoy peace and harmony.
Beautiful music and sumptuous foods allure all passers-by.
They linger and then decide to stay.
How is Dao best described?
Dao is tasteless, invisible and inaudible,
But its use is inexhaustible.

up

36

If you want to contract something, you must first stretch it.
You must first strengthen his power before you can weaken him.
Similarly, you have to build up something first before you can demolish it.
You can only take something away from somebody after they have possessed it.
This sort of platitudes is known as "subtle discernment".
The soft and the weak can overcome the hard and the strong.
Just like the fish should not leave the deep,
The machination in politics must not be revealed to the public.

up

37

Dao always sticks to non-action, yet everything develops spontaneously.
If the rulers could follow the way of Dao,
Everything under the sun will function properly.
If desire begins to creep in during the developing process,
It should be constrained by the "nameless simplicity".
The "nameless simplicity" has no designs.
Without designs, it will not create any disturbance.
Hence, peace will again prevail in the world.

up

38

The ruler with great virtue never reveals his virtue.
Hence, he truly possesses real virtue.
An ordinary ruler deliberately tries to show off his virtue.
He therefore does not possess any real virtue.
The ruler with great virtue goes with the flow.
His action encapsulates the essence of wu-wei.
The ordinary ruler deliberately tries to go with the flow.
He thus achieves the antithesis of wu-wei.
The ruler with great compassion rules benevolently without ulterior motives.
He thus captures the essence of wu-wei.
The ruler of righteousness deliberately sets out to rule benevolently.
He thus misses the essence of wu-wei.
The ruler of propriety (rites) imposes rules and regulations.
When the people do not conform, he responds with punitive measures.
Therefore, when Dao is in decline, virtue supplants it.
When virtue is in decline, benevolence replaces it.
When benevolence fails, righteousness takes its place.
When righteousness does not prevail, rites begin to exert their authority.
The prevalence of rites is the sign that loyalty and trust are wearing very thin and that serious trouble is brewing.
Clever people with prescience to foretell events represent the superficiality of Dao.
This heralds the beginning of ignorance.
Therefore, a man of substance is unsophisticated but not shallow.
He resides on the fundamental but not on the superficial.
He thus embraces the substance and rejects the trimmings.

up

39

In antiquity, the person who follows Dao said:
If the sky is harmonised with Dao, it will be clear.
When the Earth harmonises with Dao, it will be settled.
Similarly, the spirits will retain their magic power;
The valley will be filled with water.
When the ruler follows the way of Dao, his reign will be peaceful.
All these are achieved by following the way of Dao.
If the sky is not clear, it will split.
If the Earth is not settled, it will erupt.
When the spirits lose their power, they will become extinct.
The valley without water will dry up.
All forms of life without nourishment will perish.
A ruler who fails to maintain peace will be toppled.
Dignitaries rely on the support from commoners.
A tall building depends entirely on its base to stay erect.
Hence, the rulers customarily use self-deprecating words when referring to themselves.
Is this not an acknowledgement that everything originates from a humble beginning?
Everyone dislikes words like orphaned, widowed, and unworthy.
Yet, the rulers customarily use these terms to describe themselves.
The irony is that if you crave for fame, you will end up losing it.
The person who follows Dao has no desire to be valued like a beautiful jade.
Nor would he like to be rejected as an ugly stone.

up

40

Reversal is the action of Dao.
Soft and weak is the function of Dao.
Everything comes from being.
And being comes from non-being.

up

41

When a consummate scholar learns about Dao,
He studies it diligently and puts it into practice.
When a mediocre scholar hears about Dao,
He becomes totally perplexed.
When a lowly scholar hears about Dao,
He instantaneously bursts into laughter.
If it is not sneered at,
It cannot have been the real Dao.
Therefore, there was an ancient saying:
A person who knows about Dao appears to be dull.
A person who is advanced in Dao appears to be backward.
A person who travels smoothly along the path of Dao appears to be on a bumpy ride.
A person with excellent virtue appears to be quite shallow.
A person with immaculate virtue appears tarnished.
A person with great virtue appears to be inadequate.
A person with substantial virtue seems to be flimsy.
A person with genuine virtue appears to be shifty.
The greatest space has no corners.
A prodigal talent takes time to actualise.
The greatest sound is nature's sound of silence.
Dao has no form.
Dao is subtle, obscure, and indescribable.
Only Dao will give generously and help others to accomplish.

up

42

Dao engenders one. (Tai-chi)
One engenders two. (Yin and Yang)
Two engenders three. (combinations of Yin and Yang)
Three engenders everything.
Everything carries Yin and embraces Yang.
The mixing of Yin and Yang becomes an entity.
People dislike words like orphaned, widowed and unworthy.
Nevertheless, the lords use these terms as their titles.
An affair may finally turn out well despite a very bad start.
Conversely, it could turn out badly with a good start.
That is what I have learnt: nothing is certain in life.
I will use this to teach others.
However, I will still use
"Those who resort to violence will die by violence" as my principal teaching.

up

43

The world's softest can ride roughshod over the world's hardest.
The pervasive force which has no form (thickness)
Can penetrate through the substance that has no breach (crevice).
Hence, I understand the advantage of non-action.
The principles of teaching without words (speechless tuition) and the benefits of non-action (laissez faire) are peerless under the sun.

up

44

Personal glory or your life,
Which do you treasure more?
Your life or worldly possessions,
Which is more precious to you?
Gaining one but losing the other, which is more deleterious?
Therefore, wanting something badly can cost you dearly.
The more goods you hoard, the more you can possibly lose.
By being contented, you will never suffer any humiliation.
Knowing when to stop, you will never put your life in jeopardy.
Hence, you will have a long and wonderful life.

up

45

The greatest accomplishment appears imperfect, but its utility is limitless.
Immense fullness appears inadequate, yet its use is inexhaustible.
Though as straight as an arrow, it appears crooked.
Polished agility appears awkwardly clumsy.
Great eloquence appears haltingly hesitant.
Tranquillity prevails upon rashness.
Coldness overcomes heat.
The sage maintains quietude and practises non-action.
He sets an example for everyone to follow.

up

46

When Dao prevails, thoroughbred horses plough the land.
When Dao is in decline, cavalry horses give birth near the battlefields.
There is no curse worse than insatiable greed.
There is no misfortune worse than unquenchable desire.
Only a person who knows when enough is enough is always contented.

up

47

Without stepping out of the house,
You can know what is going on in the world.
Without peering out the window,
You can understand the way of Dao.
The farther you travel, the less you really know.
Therefore, the sage knows without having to travel.
Without seeing for himself, he can understand the law of nature.
Without meddling, he accomplishes easily.

up

48

In the pursuit of knowledge, your rapacity increases every day.
In the pursuit of Dao, your desire decreases daily.
It will continue to decrease until it reaches a state of wu-wei.
Adhering to non-action, you can accomplish everything easily.
You must stick to the principle of non-interference in order to rule a nation.
Once you become meddlesome, you become unfit to govern a nation.

up

49

The sage has no preconceived ideas.
He simply takes the lead from his subjects.
He treats the good people with kindness.
He also treats the bad people with kindness.
He thus cultivates the virtue of kindness.
He treats those who are trustworthy with sincerity.
He also treats those who are not trustworthy with sincerity.
Thus, he is cultivating the virtue of sincerity.
The sage always handles his affairs in an amicable way.
He steers his subjects towards a simple and unpretentious life.
Everyone pays attention to him and asks for guidance.
He nurtures them tenderly as if caring for babies.

up

50

From the time you were born, you are dying.
About one-third of people are luxuriating in longevity,
Another third are enjoying a normal life span but travelling along the path towards a natural death.
The other third are heading on the path towards a premature death.
The cause of premature death is due to overindulgence in life.
I have heard that people, who master the art of living,
Can avoid meeting a rhinoceros or tiger in the jungle.
They can avoid getting hurt by any sharp weapons in a battle.
The rhinoceros cannot employ its horn against them.
The tiger cannot attack them with its paws.
Sharp weapons cannot inflict injury on them.
Why is this so?
They simply manage to stay away from the circle of death.

up

51

Dao produces everything.
De nourishes everything.
Dao and De work in tandem and things begin to take shape.
Things begin to evolve according to the circumstances.
Hence, all beings respect and venerate Dao and De.
Dao and De are so venerated because they do not exert control.
Everything is allowed to develop naturally.
Therefore, Dao procreates everything; De nurtures.
De facilitates growth, development, fruition and ripening.
It also nourishes and protects.
Dao procreates but does not possess.
De accomplishes but does not claim credit.
It facilitates growth but does not exert control.
This is known as "inconspicuous virtue".

up

52

The world has its beginning.
It is the mother of the world (Dao).
Once you have understood the mother,
You should then begin to learn more about the son (evolution).
While learning more about the son,
You must always stick to the principles of Dao (mother).
Thus, you will never be in any danger in your whole life.
If you block out your senses, you will be calm and insouciant.
If you allow your cognitive processes to intervene with your daily affairs, you will be irremediably mired by harassment.
You have insightful wisdom if you are able to discern the minutiae in every affair.
Adhering to the principle of yielding, you are resolutely strong.
Igniting the spark of intuitive mindfulness, you thus rekindle your insightful wisdom.
Consequently, you will never court any disaster.
This is simply following the way of Dao.

up

53

Even if I confidently know that I am on the right path, I will still tread gingerly for fear of deviating from it.
The correct path of Dao is smooth and easily accessible.
However, people still choose to travel on the small paths.
While the magnificent imperial palace is immaculate and pristine,
The paddy fields are neglected and the granaries empty.
Yet, the ruler still dresses elegantly, wears fine swords and feasts in style.
He continues to amass great personal wealth.
This is the behaviour of a chief of robbers.
He is not following the way of Dao.

up

54

A person who is adept at increasing virtue will adhere to it unswervingly.
A person who holds steadfastly to his virtue will resolutely persist with it.
His deeds will endure because his progeny will continue to commemorate him for generations to come.
If he diligently cultivates his personal virtue, the virtue will be genuine.
Diligently cultivating virtue in a family, the virtue will be abundant.
Diligently cultivating virtue in a community, the virtue will be expansive.
Diligently cultivating virtue throughout the country, the virtue will be prolific.
Diligently cultivating virtue throughout the world, the virtue will be ubiquitous.
Therefore, looking from the individual perspective, you can see the benefit.
From the respective viewpoints of family, community, country or the world, the benefits are also obvious.
How do you know cultivating virtue will benefit the world?
It is through this inference.

up

55

The person of great virtue is akin to an infant.
Poison snakes and insects will not bite him.
Ferocious animals will not harm him.
Birds of prey will not attack him.
The infant is weak and floppy,
But his grip is firm and tight.
Although he does not knows anything about copulation,
He has a strong erection and this signifies the pinnacle of vitality.
He can scream all day without suffering from hoarseness.
This epitomises that his vital energy is in harmony.
When the energy is harmonised, it is acting in accord with Dao.
If you understand the way of Dao, you have transcendental wisdom.
Overindulgence in life is harmful.
Forcing the body to work beyond its limits is excessive.
Whenever anything reaches its peak, it then begins to decline.
Action that is unnatural is contrary to Dao.
Action contrary to Dao will lead to an early demise.

up

56

He who really knows does not speak.
He who speaks does not know.
You must block the portals to your sensory organs.
You must also blunt the sharp edge and reduce the complexity.
You must attenuate the glares and mix with commoners.
This is to attain "the divine oneness".
Henceforth, you are not concerned about intimacy or estrangement.
You have no concerns about advantage and disadvantage.
You have no concerns about nobility and lowliness.
Everyone treasures you.

up

57

You should govern a country by moral rectitude.
You should fight a war by employing stratagems.
You should follow the principle of non-intervention to rule a country.
How do I know all these are going to work?
Let us look at the followings:
The more rules and regulations you establish, the more destitute the people become.
The more intense the machination amongst the ruling classes, the more discordant the country will become.
The more cunning the people, the more outlandish things they do.
The more laws you proclaim, the more thieves you produce.
Therefore, the sage says:
"I follow non-action, and thus my people will live harmoniously.
I remain calm, and thus my people become righteous.
I do not meddle, and thus my people become more prosperous.
I have no desire, and thus my people will be simple and contented."

up

58

When the government is magnanimous, the people are contented and unsophisticated.
When the government is overbearing and mean-spirited, the people are resentful and miserable.
Whenever calamity occurs, boon is also lurking around the corner.
Whenever good fortune strikes, misfortune is always stalking in its shadow.
Nobody will ever know how things will end in any given situation, as there are no fixed patterns.
Sometimes, a normal affair can turn out to become exceptionally eventful.
Sometimes, an apparently good thing can go terribly wrong.
For a very long time, these things continue to befuddle the ordinary people.
Nevertheless, the sage is always sharp but not cutting.
He is incorruptible but not contemptuous of others.
He is upright and direct but not repugnant.
He is brilliant but not dazzling.

up

59

Nothing beats frugality in governing a country or following the way of Dao.
Frugality compels you to get ready in advance.
To get ready in advance means you start to amass virtues straightaway.
The accumulation of virtues will enable you to achieve practically anything in life.
Ability to accomplish anything means you have incredible power.
With this limitless power, you can govern a country.
Governing the country by following the way of Dao, you will endure.
A plant can bear great fruit only if it has deep roots.
Building deep roots is the way to perpetuate.

up

60

Governing a big country is akin to frying a small fish.
When the power of Dao is prevalent,
Even the demons become impotent.
Although the demons continue to possess magical power,
Their power is rendered innocuous.
Hence, the demons cannot harm people.
The sage also does not harm people.
Both do not interfere with people.
Thus by sticking to non-intervention, both let their virtues merge together.

up

61

When a great nation takes a low profile, it becomes the hub of small nations.
Dao is the world's mystic female.
The mystic female triumphs over the male by her quietude.
Her characteristics are quietude and humility.
If the larger nation is humble, it will gain the trust of the smaller nations and absorb them.
By being compliant, the smaller nations will gain protection from the larger nation.
Both need to take a lowly position to gain control or to be protected.
The large nation aims to embrace and expand.
The smaller nation wishes to gain protection and to prosper.
Although they both aim to achieve their respective objectives, the larger nation should still take the lower profile.

up

62

Dao is the safe haven for all beings.
The good people value it.
The bad people receive protection from it.
Words consistent with Dao will place you in a coveted position.
Deeds consistent with Dao will make you stand out from the crowd.
Even if people are bad, Dao will not reject them.
There are important events as such coronation and swearing in of ministers.
In these pompous ceremonies, officials carrying precious jade lead the procession followed by four thoroughbreds.
This largess becomes insignificant when compared to simply presenting Dao as a gift.
Why has Dao always been valued since antiquity?
It is as the saying goes:
"If you seek it, you will get it; if you make an error, you will be forgiven."
Hence, Dao is valued by all.

up

63

Normal people act rashly, but the sage does not.
Normal people interfere freely, but the sage is different.
Normal people prefer tasty cuisine, but the sage prefers plain food.
The sage will deal with all matters, big or small, by always recompensing ill will with goodwill.
To solve a complex issue, you must first start working with the easy problems.
To accomplish a huge task, you must start and graduate from a series of simpler tasks.
To solve the most complex problem, you must tackle the simplest one first.
The greatest task in the world is often the aggregation of smaller tasks.
The sage has never endeavoured to accomplish a great task.
Yet, he accomplishes a great task.
A person who readily gives promises often fails to keep them.
A person who takes things too lightly will definitely be plagued with many problems.
The sage regards everything as potentially troublesome.
Consequently, he will never encounter any difficulty.

up

64

It is easier to maintain the status quo when things are established and stabilised.
It is easier to correct things when the incipient signs of trouble have just occurred.
Fragile things disintegrate quickly.
Minute things disperse readily.
You should act well before the rot has set in.
You should take effective measures before chaos arises.
A tree broader than a man's embrace grows from a tiny seedling.
The tallest tower starts from a clod of earth.
The longest journey begins with the first step.
He who schemes will fail, and he who grasps tightly will lose it.
Hence, the sage does not scheme and will not fail.
He does not hold fast so he will not lose it.
Failure usually occurs at the cusp of succeeding.
If you pay careful attention from start to finish, there will be few failures.
What the sage wants is the opposite of what others want.
Hence, the sage does not covet rare objects.
The sage learns what others don't want to learn.
Thus, he avoids making mistakes that others commonly make.
The sage only facilitates.
He lets things evolve, but he does not interfere.

up

65

The ancient ruler who followed the way of Dao,
Attempted to make people simple and unsophisticated, not clever and scheming.
People are unruly because they are too clever and devious.
Using sophisticated measures to run a country, you can only cause harm.
Using unsophisticated measures, you will bring prosperity to the country.
These two models are consistent with the immutable principles of Dao.
Understanding the immutable principles, you are a person of inconspicuous virtue.
Inconspicuous virtue is profound and enduring.
Inconspicuous virtue is the opposite of conventional wisdom.
By going with the flow, you will achieve great harmony.

up

66

How does the sea become the king of all waters?
It is because it is good at lying low.
Hence, it is the king of all waters.
Therefore, the sage must be modest in order to reign successfully.
In order to lead, the sage must follow the people wishes.
Consequently, when the sage reigns, people are not oppressed.
When the sage leads, the people are not suppressed.
Hence, the sage is esteemed and not hated.
As the sage does not contend,
No one can contend with him.

up

67

Everyone says that Dao is so huge that it does not resemble anything we know.
As it is so phenomenally huge, it becomes incomparable.
If it does remotely resemble something on earth, then with the passage of time, its uniqueness will evaporate and gradually become inconsequential.
I steadfastly hold on to my three treasures.
These are compassion, frugality and humility.
With compassion, I can arouse real courage from my subordinates.
With frugality, I would enjoy popular support.
With humility, I become the natural leader.
Let us examine the following scenarios.
Demanding bravery from the subjects without showing compassion towards them,
Expecting popular support without dispensing benefits,
And wanting to become the leader without exhibiting humility.
These are negative attributes that will lead to self-destruction.
By applying compassion in war, you will be triumphant in attack and invincible in defence.
When Providence wants to save a nation,
It does so by bestowing great compassion to its leader.

up

68

The accomplished general does not appear intimidating.
The consummate warrior does not exhibit any anger.
The victorious commander does not contend.
A good manager often appears meek and humble.
All the above examples display the virtue of non-contention.
With this virtue you can capitalise on others' expertise.
This is in accord with the way of Dao - the celestial way.

up

69

There is a saying among the militarists:
"I would rather defend than initiate an attack.
I would be most reluctant to advance an inch but quite ready to retreat a foot."
The ultimate ideal is as follows:
Not having any battalions to form a configuration,
Not having to initiate an attack,
Not needing to take up arms,
And not having to fight a war.
There is no disaster worse than to underestimate your enemy,
For this could endanger your life.
Hence, if two evenly-matched armies fight against each other,
The aggrieved side that feels poignantly oppressed will win.

up

70

Though my words are easily comprehended and easily followed,
People do not understand and do not want to follow.
My words are based on the principles of Dao.
I also follow the same principles in all my dealings.
Because people do not understand my teachings, they fail to understand me as well.
Few people understand me.
Fewer people follow my teachings.
The sage always dresses shabbily but still embraces the treasure in his bosom.

up

71

Knowing but thinking you do not really know, you are a man of great virtue.
Not knowing but thinking that you know, you have a severe affliction.
Because you are aware of this fault, you can then try to avoid committing this mistake.
The sage has no flaws because he is cognizant of this malady.
Hence, he has no shortcomings.

up

72

When people do not respect the authority,
Legislation bearing stiff penalties will soon follow.
Nevertheless, the ruler should not make people's lives a living hell.
If the ruler is not oppressive, they will not loathe him.
Although the sage is conscious of his ability, he does not show off his talent.
While maintaining his self-righteousness, he does not flaunt his eminence.
He thus rejects parading his eminence, but he embraces his self-esteem.

up

73

Brave and reckless will be killed.
Brave but prudent will survive.
Two different types of bravery have dissimilar outcomes:
one is beneficial but the other is disastrous.
Why Providence dislikes one but not the other is a puzzle.
Even the sage is unable to fathom the reason.
The way of Dao is to accomplish without contention;
To evoke response without utterance;
All things come to pay homage without being told.
Dao does not resort to scheming but its plan is perfect.
The dragnet cast by Providence has wide meshes,
Yet, no wrongdoers ever slip through.

up

74

If people are not afraid to die, why bother threatening them with death?
If people are afraid of dying, then death penalties should be summarily dished out to criminals.
Consequently, there will be no more offenders.
Normally, Nature usually does the job of the executioner.
If the government tries to do what Nature normally does,
It is akin to the apprentice trying to do the job of the master carpenter.
The apprentice usually ends up cutting his own hand.

up

75

People are starving because they are forced to pay onerous taxes.
That is why they are starving.
People are unruly because they are burdened by excessive rules.
This is why they become unruly.
Whilst living lavishly, the ruler extorts heavy taxes from the people, forcing them to risk their lives simply to eke out a living.
That is why the people are not afraid to die.
Hence, frugal rulers are infinitely better than those harsh ones who extort heavy taxes to live luxuriously.

up

76

When a person is alive and kicking, his body is soft and pliable.
When he is dead, his body is rigid and stiff.
Living plants are soft and supple.
Dead plants become dried and stiff.
Therefore, hard and stiff epitomises the dead.
Soft and supple typifies the living.
Hence, when an army flaunts its might, it will be defeated.
As the tree grows big and tall, it will be felled.
The strong and powerful should occupy the lower position.
While the meek and weak should be sitting atop.

up

77

The way of Dao operates like the art of archery.
When you aim too high, you have to adjust downwards.
When you aim too low, you have to adjust upwards.
If the tension is excessive, you lower it.
If the tension is inadequate, you augment it.
The way of Dao is to take from the excess and give it to the deficient.
In the human realm, it is totally different.
It is the case of robbing the poor and giving it to the rich.
Who would take from the haves and give it to the have-nots?
Only the people who follow the way of Dao would.
Therefore, the sage does things without ulterior motives.
When he accomplishes, he does not claim credit.
It is because he does not want to appear sagacious.

up

78

Nothing in the world is softer and more yielding than water.
Nevertheless, among all things that can overcome the hard and strong,
None is more formidable than water and none can supplant it.
Everybody knows that the soft can overcome the hard,
And the weak can subdue the strong,
But few can put these into practice.
The ancient sage once said:
"A person who can withstand all the nation's insults,
Is fit to be the ruler.
A person who can endure all the misfortunes of the nation,
Is fit to be the king of the world."
Here lies the paradox: truthful words that are candid and self-evident may appear to be "trash talk".

up

79

To bury the hatchet following a bitter struggle does not necessarily dispel the residual hatred.
How can it be called a good resolution?
The sage only carries the credit note but does not ask for the repayment.
A person with great virtue holds the credit note but does not insist on remittance.
The immoral person relentlessly extracts exorbitant taxes from the people.
Although the way of Dao is impartial, it always gives succour to good people.

up

80

In a small and sparsely populated country,
Even if there are many talented military leaders, the nation does not require their services.
People treasure their lives and livelihoods that they loathe to emigrate.
Although there are boats and carriages, no one wants to use them.
While there are armour and weapons, there is no place to exhibit them.
People revert back to ancient way of recording events by tying knots on the string.
Their food is sumptuous.
Their garments are beautiful.
Their lodgings are comfortable.
Their social mores and customs are unsophisticated but joyous.
The neighbouring states can be sighted, and the noises of barking dogs and crowing cocks can be heard reciprocally.
Yet, people will never visit each other, never in a million years.

up

81

Truthful words are usually plain and not flowery.
Embroidered words are not always truthful.
A person who abides to the principles of Dao does not resort to sophistry.
He who resorts to sophistry to win an argument does not follow the way of Dao.
The erudite scholar may only have circumscribed knowledge.
He who has extensive knowledge may not be erudite.
The sage does not hoard.
The more he serves others, the more he has in reserve.
The more he gives away, the more he has in abundance.
The predisposition of Dao is to benefit everything, and it does not cause any harm.
The way of the sage is to accomplish but not to compete.