1

If Tao can be described, then it is not general Tao.
If a name can be denned, then it is not a general name.
The invisible is the origin of the universe.
The visible is the mother of all things.
By constantly thinking the invisible, we understand the universe;
By constantly observing the visible, we can see how the natural laws work.
Thinking and observing are two different things.
Yet they serve the same goal: to theorize.
Theorizing and evolving these theories is the gate to marvels.

up

2

People know what beauty is, because there is ugliness;
people know what good is, because there is bad.
Likewise, empty and full, difficulty and ease, long and short, high and low, sound and tone, front and rear, all go side by side.
Thus,
the sage handles affairs without the intention for fame, and teaches without preaching,
lets things develop without initialize them,
lets things grow without interfering them,
lets things move ahead without forcing them,
lets things succeed without boast about them.
Because the sage does not brag his success, he would continue to be successful.

up

3

Do not glorify the elite, and people will not compete.
Do not treasure rare things, and people will not steal them.
Do not let people see things that induce desire, and people will not commit crimes.
Thus,
the sage will make people know less, but feed them well;
make them less ambitious, but physically strong;
make people less knowledgeable and have less desire.
This way, even knowledgeable people would not dare to have ambition.
Do not coerce people, and then they are not difficult to rule.

up

4

Tao is abstract, their applicability is inexhaustible.
Abyss appears to be the origin of everything.
Deepness appears to be where the intangible exists.
Smoothening sharp edges;
Resolving conflicts;
Harmonizing glares;
Blending into the earth.
I do not know from where the theory comes, it appears to come from our late ancestors.

up

5

Heaven and earth have no bias; they treat everything as if they are the straw dogs used in ritual;
Rulers have no biases; they treat citizens as if they are the straw dogs.
The world is like the bellows.
When it is static, its ability to blow is not lost.
When it is moving, it generates more and more wind.
To go extreme is not as good as to stay normal.

up

6

God of food is eternal, so it is like the mother.
The nature mother is the root of everything.
Tao is long lasting and never exhausted in application.

up

7

The universe is long-lasting.
The reason it can last long is because it is not living for itself, therefore it can be enduring.
Following this,
the sage is modest and yet he is ahead of others;
he cares less for himself, and yet he gains respect from others;
is it not because he is not anxious for his goal, and yet his goal is achieved?

up

8

The best virtue is like water.
Water nurtures everything; yet, without rivaling, it flows towards lower grounds, where people would be reluctant to go.
Water behaves like following Tao.
Live in suitable place;
Think deeply;
Give generously;
Keep one's words;
Rule orderly;
Do things ably;
Act when the time is right.
Do not rival, then there would be no trouble.

up

9

To fill to its full is not as good as to leave it alone.
Why make things very sharp, if the edge can not keep long-lasting sharpness.
Greed for treasure cannot make the fortune last.
Rich and arrogant, one would bring troubles for oneself.
Retire when the goal is achieved; this conforms to Tao.

up

10

Can you keep your mind and your action consistent?
Can you be simple and sincere like a baby?
Can you view things without bias?
Can you govern without imposing your will?
Can you be moderate in daily business?
Can you keep open mind when learning?
Birth and growth are natural.
Do not think birth is someone's achievements.
Do not be vainglorious for your accomplishments.
Do not impede growth.
This is called the profound virtue.

up

11

Thirty spokes connected to one hub with a hole (for shaft), can be used as a wheel.
Using clay to make a concave pottery, it can be used as a container.
Buildings with doors and windows can be houses.
Therefore, solidness provides the utility, and hollowness makes things useful.

up

12

Five colors harm the eyes.
Five tones impair the ear.
Five flavors numb the taste.
Horse racing and hunting make people exuberant.
Hard-to-get things burden people.
Therefore, the sage seeks inner satisfaction, rather than showy appearance.
That is, emphasizing what is on the inside, instead of what is on the outside.

up

13

The honor and the disgrace are like emotional impacts.
The disaster is regarded as the threat to life.
What does it mean by "The honor and the disgrace are like emotional impacts?"
The honor is awarded to subordinates.
When the honor is obtained, people are thrilled;
when the honor is lost, people are depressed.
So they are emotionally impacted.
What does it mean by "The disaster is regarded as the threat to life?"
The reason we feel threatened because we care too much about ourselves.
If we are selfless, who can threaten us?
To those who can sacrifice themselves for the world, we can trust them with the world.
To those who love the people more than themselves, we can handle the ruling power.

up

14

Tao cannot be seen, cannot be heard, and cannot be grasped.
We cannot detect them with our senses.
Therefore, they form an entirety of Tao.
It is neither too bright above, nor is it too dark below.
It exists everywhere and yet cannot be pointed out.
So it is ultimately abstract.
It is a state without concrete constitution; it is an image without concrete shape.
So it is evasive.
When you look at it, you cannot see the beginning; when you follow it, you cannot see the end.
Using the time-tested Tao, we can handle the present problems.
Therefore, whose who understand Tao understand the laws of the universe.

up

15

In history, those who mastered Tao are extremely knowledgeable with profound expertise.
Hence they are hard to describe.
Because of this, I can only roughly portray them as follows:
Being prudent as if walking across the thin ice of the river,
Being alert as if being surrounded with the danger,
Being dignified like a guest,
Being relaxed as if thawing,
Being sincere and natural like uncarved wood,
Being open-hearted like valley,
Being approachable like the earth,
Being broad like ocean,
Being active like wind blowing.
Can the murkiness be clarified slowly?
Can a halt start to move gradually?
Those who know Tao would never be complacent.
It is because of this they can be refreshing, creative, and innovative.

up

16

Without slightest prejudice and being extremely concentrated, one can handle the complex matters even they happen in parallel.
Various things have their roots.
When the root is found, we reach the goal.
This is the law of the nature, i.e. the nature of the universe.
It is wise to know the law of the nature.
Without the knowing it and act blindly would doom to fail.
Knowing the Tao makes people open-minded.
Open-mindedness leads to completeness.
Completeness is conformed to the nature.
Conforming to nature is Tao.
Tao means long-lasting.
Therefore, those who know Tao would be always successful.

up

17

The best government is one in which its citizens are unaware of its existence.
The next best rewards the citizens so that they are loyal.
A worse one, make the citizens fear.
The worst causes them to rebel.
Because such rulers lose credibility therefore people no longer trust them.
Take it easy and never abuse the power.
This will make rulers more successful and satisfied.
In turn, the citizen would praise such rulers who make them at ease.

up

18

Because morality is abandoned, good behavior becomes distinguished.
Because there is cleverness, cheating could accompany it.
Because family members do not get along, rules for respecting elderly and loving youngsters are created.
Because the country is in chaos, there is need for honest and able officers to uphold order.

up

19

Don't devise tricks to rule people and people will benefit enormously.
Don't artificially set the rules for family relations and people will return to their nature of loving each other.
Don't reward cleverness and profit, the robberies and the thefts will disappear.
The three measures stated above are not enough.
We must fill people's mind with frugality, honesty, selflessness, and abstinence.

up

20

Studying thoroughly makes people free of worries.
What is the difference between yes and no?
What is the difference between good and evil?
Don't fear when the crowd is afraid.
Why do people feel perplexed?
Because the universe is infinite!
People are cheerful, as if at banquets, and as if sight seeing from a tower in spring.
I show no emotion, like an infant, and as if wandering aimlessly.
People have plenty, but I am alone as if I have lost everything.
I look foolish and stupid.
Ordinary crowds look smart, while I appear naive.
Ordinary crowds look sharp, while I appear dull.
People look deft, while I appear awkward.
I am different from the crowd.
This is because I follow Tao.

up

21

The state of the world follows the Tao.
What is Tao?
It is intangible.
Foggily and hazily there appears to be an image.
Hazily and foggily there seems to be an object.
Distantly and elusively it emerges over there.
It is the truth.
It is believable.
From ancient time, it has been there; everything is following it.
How do I know it is so?
From everything that is observable.

up

22

Malleability preserves entirety.
Mistakes teach lessons.
Empty containers can be filled.
Breakages cause replacement.
Less makes success.
Much leads to confusion.
Thus the sage believes Tao is the only law of the universe.
He does not brag himself so he can be held in great respect.
He does not assume he is always right so he can be unbiased.
He does not exaggerate so he can be right.
He is not vainglorious so he can keep making progress.
If you do not compete, then no one can compete with you in the world.
So how can the old saying, such as 'Malleability preserves entirety', be not without truth?
They all return to Tao.

up

23

Preaching less conforms to the natural way.
A squall rarely lasts a whole morning.
A downpour rarely continues all the day.
Who makes the wind and rain?
It is the nature.
If the nature cannot have long-lasting stamina, how can people?
Therefore, those who follow Tao live with Tao.
Those who follow Te live with Te.
Those who follow nothing live with nothing.
Those who live with Tao are happy with Tao.
Those who live with Te are happy with Te.
Those who live with nothing abandon Tao.
There are people who are not whole-heartedly Tao-believer.
There are people who do not believe in Tao at all.

up

24

On tiptoes, one cannot stand steadily.
Astride, one cannot walk ahead.
Those who brag about themselves cannot be held in great respect.
Those who assume they are always right cannot be outstanding.
Those who go to the extreme cannot achieve goals.
Those who are vainglorious cannot keep making progress.
This is Tao.
Those behaviors, like leftover food or an overweight person, are unattractive to everyone.
Thus Tao followers avoid them.

up

25

There had been a chaotic object before the universe was born.
It is quiet and intangible.
It stays alone without changing.
It moves around without stopping.
It may be the mother of the universe.
I do not know the object's name.
I have attempted to designate it Tao, and to call it great.
The great constantly moves.
Constantly moving it reaches far.
Far-reaching causes it to return.
Therefore, Tao is great, the heaven is great, the earth is great, and the human is also great.
There are four greats in the universe, and the human is one of them.
The human follows the earth, the earth follows the heaven, the heaven follows Tao, and Tao goes naturally.

up

26

Prudence is more stable than frivolity.
Rationality is superior to impatience.
Therefore, the sage always behaves prudently and rationally.
Even when successful, he is not carried away.
How could the king of a big kingdom rule without prudence?
Frivolity results in the loss of stability.
Impatience leads to the loss of superiority.

up

27

An able driver leaves no ruts and tracks.
An eloquent speaking is flawlessly fluent.
A smart counter uses no tools.
A superb lock cannot be opened, yet it has not bolts.
A good tie cannot get loose, yet there is no rope used.
The sage constantly saves people, so nobody is abandoned;
And constantly saves things, so nothing is wasted.
This is intelligent.
Thus, able people can be the teachers of incompetent people.
The failure of incompetent people can serve as lessons for the able people.
Ignoring the teachers and neglecting the lessons make even the smart people blunder.
This is an extremely important point.

up

28

Knowing what nobility is, the sage stays with the lowly, as if the creek of the world.
As the creek of the world he flows without leaving the general Te until he reaches a status as innocent as a baby.
Knowing what cleanliness is, he does not mind staying dirty, He acts as the norm of the world.
As the norm of the world, he makes no mistakes, until he approaches Tao.
Knowing what honor is, he tolerates insults.
He acts as the valley of the world.
As the valley of the world, he is filled with general Te, until he returns to simplicity.
Wood that has been naturally broken can be made into utensils.
When sages are employed, they can be officers.
Great systems do not need to be carved.

up

29

To conquer and rule the world, I think, is not achievable.
The world is like a sacred utensil, which cannot be taken and held.
Whoever tries to conquer it will fail.
Whoever tries to hold it will lose it.
Thus, the sage does not try this, so he can avoid failure.
The sage does not try to own the world, so he loses nothing.
Things can be fast or slow, warm or cool, strong or weak, light or heavy.
The sage avoids the excessive, extravagant, and grandiose.

up

30

Those who aid the ruler with Tao do not use military power to win the world.
This is because such action is likely to backfire:
Where armies camp, thorny problems arise,
Where troops march, fatal years follow.
The competent general stops when the goal is reached, and never flaunts.
Never be vainglorious when the goal is achieved.
Never be haughty when the goal is achieved.
Never be arrogant when the goal is achieved.
Never do more than necessary when the goal is achieved.
Never flaunt when the goal is achieved.
It is not following Tao if things wilt while still in their prime.
Not following Tao results in an untimely end.

up

31

Weapons are destructive.
They are generally disliked.
Therefore, Tao-followers avoid them.
At home, Gentlemen are happy in left seats.
When in war, gentlemen prefer to the right.
Since weapons are destructive, they are not gentlemen's tools.
They are used as a last resort.
It is better to be cautious.
After winning, one should not glorify the victory.
By glorifying war, one takes delight in killing.
Those who take delight in killing will not win the world.
In joyful events the left is honored.
In funerals the right side is honored.
The lieutenant commander positions to the left.
The command-in-chief positions to the right.
This is following funeral convention.
When casualties are heavy, honor the deaths with grief.
Treat victory as if it is a funeral.

up

32

Tao does not have a name and is simple.
It is small, but no one can rule it.
If kings and nobles can follow it, the people themselves would be submissive.
When heaven and earth work together, rain is produced.
Nobody gives the order, it is produced naturally.
When a regulation is initiated, it should have a reason.
When there is a reason, we need to know where to stop.
If we know where to stop, we may avoid failure.
Tao to the world is like the sea to the rivers.

up

33

Knowing others is smart.
Knowing oneself is clearheaded.
Winning others is forceful.
Winning oneself is powerful.
Content people are rich.
Diligent people are of high purpose.
Those, who stay their grounds, stand out.
Those, who die without being forgotten, are perpetual.

up

34

Tao is everywhere.
It can be guidance.
Everything lives depending on it without exception, With such accomplishment, it claims none.
Providing clothing and food to everything, it does not govern them: this is called lowliness.
Guiding everything, it does not master, this can be called greatness.
Because it does not proclaim to be great, it can actually be great.

up

35

Those who grasp Tao will be followed by the whole world.
Following without worries, the world becomes secure, peaceful, and prosperous.
Music and banquet make the travelers stop by.
But when Tao is said, it is plain and flavorless.
It is invisible when it is looked at.
It is inaudible when it is listened to.
It is inexhaustible when it is utilized.

up

36

In order to reduce it, first expand it.
In order to weaken it, first strengthen it.
In order to abolish it, first establish it.
In order to take it, first give it.
This is called subtle wisdom.
Flexibility and compromise win out over stiffness and aggressiveness.
Fish cannot leave water.
Never show the country's best weapons to the enemy.

up

37

Tao normally does not interfere, yet it plays a role everywhere.
If the kings and nobles can follow it, everything would become submissive.
If rebellion is attempted, I will use Tao's extreme honesty to suppress it.
Using Tao's extreme honesty to suppress it, people would have no ambition.
With no ambition, people would be peaceful.
Thus, the world would go back to normal.

up

38

High Te is Te because it is not showy.
Low Te is not Te because it is showy.
People with high Te do not force their way but they have their way.
People with low Te have no way except to force their way.
Top benevolence standard has its way without forcing it.
Top moral conduct has its way with efforts.
Top ritual rules have their way with rare response.
Then force is used to make people comply.
Therefore, when Tao is lost, Te is established.
When Te is lost, a benevolent standard is established.
When the benevolent standard is lost, moral conduct is established.
When moral conduct is lost, ritual rules are established.
So-called ritual rules do not advocate honesty and trustworthiness.
Thus, they are the source of disorder.
Boasting scholars are the flashy decorations of Tao; they are the origin of stupidity.
Consequently, great men stay with profoundness, avoid superficiality.
They stay with substance, avoid flashy superficies.
That is, they take former and avoid latter.

up

39

Previously those who have integrity are as follows:
Heaven has integrity, so it is clear.
Earth has integrity, so it is peaceful.
Gods have integrity, so they are responsive.
Valleys have integrity, so they are full.
All living creatures have integrity, so they can live.
Kings and lords have integrity, so they can govern normally.
Why is it so?
If Heaven is not clear, it could split.
If Earth is not peaceful, it could collapse.
If Gods are not responsive, nobody would worship.
If valleys are not full, they could be depleted.
If living creatures cannot live, they would become extinct.
If Kings and lords cannot govern normally, they would fall.
Therefore, humbleness is the root from which nobleness grows.
Low is the foundation on which high is built.
It is because of this, kings and lord call themselves lonely persons, friendless persons, and worthless persons.
This is for the sake of being humble, is it not?
The extremely honorable is the one without being honored.
They do not want to be like glittering jades, but like solid rocks.

up

40

According to Tao, recurrence is the way of motion.
According to Tao, flexibility is the way of application.
The all things in the world come from the visible, which comes from the invisible.

up

41

When hearing Tao, the intelligent people practice it diligently.
The average people practice it casually.
Ignorant people laugh at it.
If it were not laughed at, it would not be Tao.
It is said that true Tao-followers appear to be ignorant.
Although they are making progress, they appear to be receding.
The perfect Tao appears to be blemished.
High Te is like the valleys.
Bright white appears to be tarnished.
Broad kindness appears to be insufficient.
Diligent people could look lazy.
Authentic qualities could look faked.
A great square appears to have no corner.
Great success does not achieve early.
Great music does not sound loud.
Great image does not have form.
Tao is invisible and nameless.
It is only Tao that can lend help and make endeavors successful.

up

42

Tao produce unity.
Unity splits into two.
Two gives birth to three.
Three produces everything.
Everything carries Yin and embraces Yang.
Yin and Yang work together makes harmony.
Loneliness, friendlessness, and worthlessness are generally disliked.
Yet, kings and lords use these terms to describe themselves.
Things can benefit from damages.
Things can also be damaged from benefits.
Therefore, I can teach what the other taught me:
Those who act against the law of the Nature will never get what they want.
This is a basic principle for me to teach.

up

43

The most flexible wins out over the stiffest.
The shapeless can be omnipresent.
I know it is beneficial not use brute force.
The best in the world teach without preaching, and act without using force.

up

44

Which is dearer, fame or health?
Which is more important, wealth or health?
Which is more damaging, obtaining the former or losing the latter?
Excessively loving results in great expense.
Excessive stocking leads to huge losses.
Therefore those who are not greedy can avoid disgrace.
Those who know where to stop can avoid failure.
They can have long-lasting success.

up

45

Great achievement appears imperfect, Its application is limitless.
Complete fullness appears empty, It cannot be used up.
Perfect straightness appears bent.
Adept skills appear awkward.
Great eloquence appears dull.
The calm wins out over the impatient.
The cold wins out over the heat.
Serenity makes the world orderly.

up

46

When Tao is dominant, the fast horse is used for farming.
When Tao is lost, the female horse is used for war and gives birth in the field.
The worst misfortune is insatiability.
The worst mistake is rapacity.
Therefore, content from knowing enough makes people always satisfied.

up

47

Without leaving home, one can know the world.
Without watching through window, one can know astronomy.
The farther one travels, the less one understands.
Therefore, the sage knows without traveling, understands without seeing, and succeeds without forcing.

up

48

Studying can be of benefit from day to day.
Following Tao one uses less force day after day.
Less and less, one uses no force.
Yet, he succeeds in everything.
To govern the world, one interferes nothing.
If he interferes, he is unqualified to govern the world.

up

49

Sages have no mind-set.
They take common people's concerns as theirs.
Good people, I treat them well.
Bad people, I also treat them well.
This is the virtue of kindness.
Good people, I trust them properly.
Bad people, I also trust them properly.
This is virtue of trust.
Sages in the world have no bias.
They mix their mind with that of common people.
This is why people follow them.
Sages treat people as if they were their own children.

up

50

In the life and death cycle,
Three in ten enjoy natural longevity,
Three in ten die normally.
There are some, three in ten, who die unnaturally.
Why it is so?
Because they indulge themselves excessively.
It is well known that those who are good at protect themselves steer clear of rhinos and tigers when walking, And hardly hurt by armed enemy.
This is because rhinos cannot find them to gore,
Tigers cannot find them to claw,
Enemies cannot get a chance to use weapons upon them.
What is the reason?
They never put themselves into a fatal situation.

up

51

Everything is born from Tao, and nurtured by Te; shaped by substance, and completed by environment.
Thus, everything follows Tao and is guided by Te.
Tao is honored.
Te is valued.
This is not the result of promotion, but occurs naturally.
This is why everything is born by Tao and nurtured by Te.
Te raises, educates, mentors, coaches, nourishes, and protects everything.
Giving lives without possessing them,
Guiding without forcing,
Developing without controlling,
This is called Profound Te.

up

52

The world has an origin.
The origin is the mother.
Knowing the mother, we know the son.
Knowing the son, we deduce the mother.
This way, we can be successful.
Plugging leakages,
Closing openings,
We can never be depleted.
Opening leakages,
Making too many commitments,
We can be hopeless.
Those who pay attention to details are wise.
Those who exercise flexibility are strong.
Use the light,
Things are illuminated.
Thus we can avoid mistakes.
This is called normal behavior.

up

53

I firmly believe that I must follow Tao.
What I fear is to wander astray.
Tao is like a boulevard.
Yet, some people prefer small trails.
The yards are excessively clean, the fields full of weeds, and the warehouses nearly empty.
Dressing extravagantly, carrying sharp swords, wasting food, excessively collecting money or properties are the worst sins.
These do not conform to Tao.

up

54

What is established cannot be uprooted.
What is well held cannot slip.
Likewise, descendents will continue to perform traditional rituals.
Cultivating oneself, Te is genuine.
Cultivating the family, Te is plentiful.
Cultivating the village, Te is long lasting.
Cultivating the kingdom, Te is prevailing.
Cultivating the world, Te is ubiquitous.
Therefore, observe all individuals through one individual.
Observe all families through one family.
Observe all villages through one village.
Observe all kingdoms through one kingdom.
Observe all worlds through the world.
How do I know the world is so?
By using the above observation(s).

up

55

People with profound Te are like babies.
Poisonous insects cannot bite them.
Ferocious beasts cannot grab them.
Birds of prey cannot pounce on them.
With tough bones and flexible muscles they can hold firmly.
Without knowing male and female union, sexual organs can function, because the hormone comes into play.
They can cry a whole day without getting hoarse, because harmony comes into play.
Knowing harmony is called normalcy.
Knowing normalcy is called wisdom.
Fortifying oneself is ominous.
Things become old while still in their golden time.
This does not conform to Tao.
Departing from Tao leads to a premature end.

up

56

Knowledgeable people rarely show off.
Boastful people are not truly knowledgeable.
Block up leakages;
Close doors;
Smooth out sharp edges;
Resolve conflicts;
Harmonize glares;
And blend into the base.
These are profound concords.
Do not become intimate when receiving the desired.
Do not become alienating when receiving the undesired.
Do not become greedy when obtaining profit.
Do not retaliate when receiving hostility.
Do not prize when obtaining the precious.
Do not debase when receiving humility.
Doing so can gain respect from others.

up

57

Govern the kingdom by the normal way.
Fight the battle by the unexpected way.
And one can win the world without using force.
How do I know this is so?
By the following:
When there are too many restrictions and regulations, people become poor.
When there are too many weapons, the kingdom is in disarray.
When there are too many tricks, bizarre things happen.
When there are too many decrees, the crime rate increases.
This is why the sage says:
"I do not force my way, and people live peacefully.
I keep quiet, and people live normally.
I do not interfere, and people become rich.
I do not covet anything, and people would be honest."

up

58

If the policy is liberal, people are honest.
If the policy is stringent, people play tricks.
Misfortune is where fortune can build upon.
Fortune is where misfortune can loom.
Who knows where is the extreme?
There is no such a thing as normal.
Normalcy can become an anomaly.
Good can become evil.
This has puzzled people for a long time.
This is why the sage is righteous yet not annoying.
He is just, yet not harsh.
He is outspoken, yet not offensive.
He is shiny, yet not glaring.

up

59

Frugality is the best for governing people or serving heaven.
With frugality, we can be prepared in advance.
Advanced preparation is to emphasize accumulating Te.
Accumulating Te, we can accomplish any endeavor.
Accomplishing any endeavor means there is not limit.
With no limit we can have a kingdom.
With frugality as the mother of the kingdom, the kingdom can last long.
This is called deep root and firm foundation.
With such root and foundation we can enjoy longevity.

up

60

Governing a big kingdom is like cooking small seafood.
With Tao as guidance, evils will never have their way.
It is actually not that the evils do not have their way, but that the evils will not hurt people.
Not only do Evils not hurt people, but also do not hurt the sage.
When both people and the sage are not hurt, Te is in dominance.

up

61

A great kingdom is like the mouth of rivers; it is like the female, or the hub of the world.
Females frequently win males with their serenity.
Serenity means humbleness.
Therefore when a great kingdom is humble, it wins small kingdoms.
When a small kingdom is humble, it wins great kingdoms.
This is why with humbleness one can win and will win.
A great kingdom should not excessively conquer.
A small kingdom should avoid undue vassalage.
In order for both great and small kingdoms to have their wishes, it is better for great kingdoms to be humble.

up

62

Tao is the law of the universe.
For able people Tao is a treasure.
For less able people, Tao is a guardian.
Good words can win reverence.
Good behavior can win admiration.
For people who are inept, should they be abandoned?
Therefore for the emperor who is enthroned and the three senior administrators who are appointed, there may be priceless jades and fast carriages, none is as good as adopting Tao.
Why Tao is so treasured by generations?
Is it not because it helps us reach our goals and avoid mistakes?
Therefore it is treasured by the whole world.

up

63

Practice no forcing; undertake natural tasks; eat plain food.
No matter big or small, more or less, reply hostility with kindness.
When handling difficulties, one should start with the easiest first.
When eating the elephant, take one bite at a time.
In the world, difficult tasks are composed of easy ones;
Big tasks are formed by small ones.
This is why the sage never attempt big, but can achieve big.
Easily promising results in less credibility.
Broadly underestimating leads to a lot of difficulties.
This is why sages treat everything as if it was difficult.
So they never have difficulties.

up

64

When things are stable, it is easy to hold.
When problems have not occurred, they are easy to cope with.
When things are brittle, they break easily.
When things are tiny, they dissolve easily.
Prepare for problems before they appear.
Put things in order before they become chaotic.
Giant trees grow from tiny seeds.
High-rise buildings start from the first mound of earth.
Long journeys begin with a first step.
People often fail when the tasks are close to complete.
If they keep working as diligently as the beginning, then they would not fail.
Sages want things others do not want.
They do not treasure rare goods.
They study things others ignore.
They remind themselves of others' mistakes.
They let everything develops naturally and do not dare to force it.

up

65

In the past, those who are good at Tao did not encourage people to be shrewd.
They encourage people to be honest.
People are difficult to govern if they are sly.
Advocating slyness in governing is the misfortune of a kingdom.
Opposing slyness in governing is the blessing of a kingdom.
Note that the above two points are also guidelines.
Constantly noticing the guidelines is Profound Te.
Profound Te is deep, broad, and against instinct.
But it can leads to great success.

up

66

The river and the sea can be the king of hundreds of valleys, because they are adept to place themselves low.
This is why they can be the kings of hundreds of valleys.
Therefore sages speak humbly in order to win people.
They put people before themselves in order to lead people.
This is why when sages are the superior, people do not feel oppressed.
When sages are leading, people would not be hurt.
Consequently, when world is happy to support them and is never tired.
Since the sage does not contend with anybody, nobody can compete with one.

up

67

People in the world say to me that Tao is great but it resembles nothing.
It is because of the greatness that nothing is like it.
If it were similar to anything, it would have turned trivial long ago.
I have three great treasures - Hold and maintain them.
The first is kindness.
The second is frugality.
The third is the reluctance to be prestigious in the world.
Being kind, one can have courage.
Being frugal, one can grow wide.
Reluctance to be prestigious, one can become the leader.
If one is courageous without kindness, expanding without frugality, and prestigious without modesty, he is doomed to fail.
With kindness, one would win in war, and be secure in defense.
When heaven come to rescue, it guards by using kindness.

up

68

Those who are good at management rarely use force.
Those who are good at battles rarely lose their tempers.
Those who are good at winning over their rivals never let rivals take control.
Those who are good at employing people are modest.
This is the noncompetitive virtue.
This is the use of people's abilities.
This is called the best conformation to nature and history.

up

69

It is a military saying that when engaging in war, we do not aggress but defend; we do not advance an inch but retreat a foot.
This is marching without formation.
Do not roll up sleeves.
Confront no enemy.
Commit to no weapons.
The most serious mistake is to underestimate the enemy.
Underestimating the enemy almost caused me to lose my treasures.
Thus, when two comparable armies fight, the lamenting one wins.

up

70

My words are easy to understand and easy to practice.
However, people in the world rarely understand and practice them.
The words have their origins.
The events have their causes.
People can hardly understand this.
Therefore they rarely understand me.
Few people understand me.
Those who do follow me are prized.
This is why sages dress in crude clothes but carry jades.

up

71

Knowing what is not known is good.
Not knowing but pretending to know is bad.
Sages rarely ail, because they hate ills.
Thus, hating ills, one can be free of ills.

up

72

When people defy authority, great threat will come.
Do not disturb people's homes; do not interfere with people's lives.
Only this way, we can avoid getting weary.
Sages know themselves but are not presumptuous.
They have self-esteem but are not self-conceit.
That is, take the former and abandon the latter.

up

73

When courage is combined with boldness, one dies.
When courage is combined with prudence, one survives.
Of the two, which is beneficial and which is harmful?
It is hard to know what Heaven dislikes.
This is why even sages feel the difficulty.
The Tao of the nature is that:
The best winnings come without rivaling.
The best responses are not wordy.
The best friends come without formal invitation.
The best plans are made when relaxed.
Heaven's net is wide.
Although it has meshes, nothing escapes from it.

up

74

If people are not afraid to die, how death can be used to threaten them?
If we make people afraid of death, and execute a few extreme offenders, who would dare to offend again?
It is normal to have executioners who kill.
Substituting an executioner in killing is like substituting a master lumberjack in chopping trees.
Chopping trees by non-professionals rarely results in no hand injuries.

up

75

People starve because they pay heavy taxes.
People are hard to govern because the rulers force their wishes on people.
People are not afraid to rebel, because the rulers live extravagantly.
Therefore those who avoid extravagant life-style are wiser than those who live extravagantly.

up

76

When alive, people are pliable and soft; at death, people become rigid and hard.
When alive, grasses and trees are flexible and tender; at death, they become withered and rotten.
Therefore, rigidity leads to death, flexibility results in survival.
It is because of this, the inflexible army would be defeated, like stiff trees would be broken by wind.
The big and rigid would be overtaken by the nimble and flexible.

up

77

Tao of Nature is like tensing the string of a bow.
The high parts of the string comes down, the low parts lift up.
If it is too long, then we cut out excessive part.
If it is too short, then we add some.
It is Tao of Nature that excessive part is reduced and insufficient part is supplemented.
But Tao of People is opposite.
The poor become poorer.
The rich become richer.
Only those who have Te can donate their surplus to the world.
This is why sages work but do not force their way, and succeed but do not glorify their merits.
It is their modesty that is wise.

up

78

Nothing in the world is more flexible and adaptable than water.
Yet, when conquering the hard and strong, nothing is better.
This is because water does not have definite shape.
The yielding wins over the strong.
Flexibility wins over rigidity.
Everybody understands this.
But few practice it.
Therefore the sage says:
"Those, who can endure disgrace for their kingdom, can be the head of the kingdom;
Those, who can accept misfortune for their kingdom, can be Emperor of the world."
These logical words appear to be controversial.

up

79

After big conflicts are reconciled, some hostility may remain.
Reply the resentment with kindness.
Is it not good?
Thus a sage keeps the creditor's deed but does not demand the payment.
People with Te are like creditors.
People without Te are like tax collectors.
Tao of the nature does not discriminate.
It constantly provides benefit to all people.

up

80

In small countries with fewer people,
No delicate utensils are used.
Make people fear death so that they refuse to venture far away.
Although there are vehicles and boats, nobody uses them.
Although there are troops and weapons, they are not deployed.
Let people once again use knot-tying to keep records.
Let people enjoy their food, beautify their clothes, live peacefully, and be happy with their traditions.
Although neighboring kingdoms are within sight; and dog barks and roster crows can be heard over the border, but people never interfere with each other in their lifetime.

up

81

Credible words are not sweet; sweet words are not credible.
Honest people do not need to argue for themselves; those who argue for themselves are not honest.
Experts have deep knowledge about their specialties; those who try to learn everything would know little about each.
Sages never accumulate wealth.
They believe the more they give up, the more they have;
And the more they give away, the more they accumulate.
Tao of the Nature is this: benefiting without harming.
Tao of People is this: achieving without rivaling.