1

The Tao that is utterable
Is not the eternal Tao;
The name that is namable
Is not the eternal Name.
The Nothingness is the name of the beginning of heaven and earth;
The Being (substance) is the name of the mother of all things.
Hence one should gain an insight into the beginning of the Tao by constantly observing the Nothingness,
And should perceive the end of the Tao by constantly observing the Being.
These two things, the Nothingness and the Being, are of the same origin but different in name.
They are both so profound as to be a key to the door of myriad secrets.

up

2

The whole world knows the beautiful as beautiful
Only because of the existence of the ugly;
The whole world knows the good as good
Only because of the existence of the bad.
Hence the Being and the Nothingness exist in opposition;
The difficult and the easy complement each other;
The long and the short manifest themselves by comparison;
The high and the low are inclined as well as opposed to each other;
The consonants and vowels harmonize with each other;
The front and the back follow each other.
Thus the sage behaves
Without taking active action,
Teaches without using words,
Lets all things rip without interference,
Gives them life without claiming to be their owner,
Benefits them without claiming to be their benefactor, succeeds without claiming credit.
Because he does not claim credit,
His credit is never lost.

up

3

Keep the people from contention by disregarding men of abilities;
Keep the people from theft by not valuing rare goods;
Keep the people from the disturbed state of mind by concealing what is desirable.
That is why in governing the people
The sage simplifies their minds but fills up their stomachs;
weakens their wills, but strengthens their bones.
By keeping the people from knowledge and desires,
He disables wise men from taking any active action.
Act in accordance with this principle of inaction
And the world will be kept in order everywhere.

up

4

The Tao is invisibly empty,
But its use is extremely plentiful.
It is profound like the originator of all things.
It shows no sharpness,
stays away from entanglements,
glows with veiled radiance,
mingles with dust.
It is formless and invisible, but indeed exists.
I do not know where it comes,
It seems to have appeared before the existence of God.

up

5

Heaven and earth are not merciful,
They treat all things as straw dogs;
The sage is not merciful,
He treats the people as straw dogs.
Does not the space between heaven and earth form like a bellows?
It is empty but (the air in it) can never be exhausted;
The more air it expels, the more comes out.
That is why too many government decrees only result in more failures.
It is better, therefore, to hold fast to moderation and the void.

up

6

The Tao never dies;
It is a deep womb.
And the opening of the womb
Is called the root of heaven and earth.
It exists for ever,
And its use can never be exhausted.

up

7

Heaven and earth exist for ever.
This eternal existence is justified by the fact
That they do not exist for themselves.
Thus they enjoy an eternal life.
The sage similarly puts himself behind others,
Yet it turns out that he comes before others;
He completely disregards his own existence,
And yet it turns out that his existence is preserved.

up

8

The perfect goodness is like water.
Water approaches all things instead of contending with them.
It prefers to dwell where no one would like to stay;
Hence it comes close to the Tao.
A man of perfect goodness chooses a low place to dwell as water,
He has a heart as deep as water,
He offers friendship as tender as water,
He speaks as sincerely as water,
He rules a state as orderly as water,
He does a thing as properly as water,
He takes action as timely as water.
Like water, he never contends with others,
So he never commits a mistake.

up

9

One should stop in due time
Rather than fill it to the brim.
When a point is whittled too sharp,
Its sharpness cannot remains long.
When a hall is full of gold and jade,
Nobody can keep them long;
When a man of wealth and rank is arrogant,
He is looking for a calamity upon himself;
When one succeeds and subsequently retires,
He follows the true way of heaven.

up

10

Body and soul are one,
But can they avoid separation?
Though concentrating on breathing exercises to be supple,
Can you become as supple as a baby?
Though getting rid of your distracting thoughts for a deeper meditation,
Can you be devoid of blemish?
If you are to love the people and govern a state,
Can you avoid taking active action?
When the door of heaven opens or closes,
Can you remain inactive as a female?
When your power of perception penetrates every corner,
Are you capable of knowing nothing?
Giving all things life and propagation
Without claiming to be their owner,
Benefiting them without claiming to be their benefactor,
And being their head without ruling them,
All these are called the most intrinsic Teh (virtue).

up

11

Thirty spokes share one hub.
It is just the space (the Nothingness) between them
That makes a cart function as a cart.
Knead clay to make a vessel
And you find within it the space
That makes a vessel as a vessel.
To build a house with doors and windows
And you find within them the space
That makes a house function as a house.
Hence the Being (substance) can provide a condition
Under which usefulness is found,
But the Nothingness (space) is the usefulness itself.

up

12

The five colours make man blind;
The five sounds make man deaf;
The five tastes make man lose his sense of taste;
Riding and hunting make man wild with excitement;
Rare goods goad man into stealing;
Thus the sage does not satisfy his eyes with colours
But satisfy his stomach with enough food.
He discards the former and takes the latter.

up

13

Honor and disgrace are both startling.
It is like cherishing great trouble (vanity) as one's life and body.
What is meant by saying that honor and disgrace are startling?
Honor itself, though mean, gives pleasant surprise to those who obtain it
As well as startles them when they lose it.
What is meant by saying that it is like cherishing great trouble as one's life and body?
Because my life and body is the very source of great trouble.
If I have no body and life,
What trouble can I suffer?
Thus he who can value the empire as he values his own life and body
Can be entrusted with the care of the empire.
Thus he who can cherish the empire as he cherishes his own life and body
Can be entrusted with the care of the empire.

up

14

What cannot be seen is called "Yi" (without colour);
What cannot be heard is called "Xi" (without sound);
What cannot be touched is called "Wei" (without shape);
These three things can be in no way defined,
So they are combined into one.
Above it there is no light;
Below it there is no darkness;
So vague as to defy any description.
It is categorized as the Nothingness,
And is called the shape without shape as well as the image without substance.
It is hence named as "huhuang" (vague and dimly visible).
Facing it, you cannot see its front;
Following it, you cannot see its back.
To control the present Being (substance) by employing the Tao of ancient time,
One knows the beginning of the universe.
And this is called the law of the Tao.

up

15

Those ancients who were well versed in the Tao
Were so subtle, mysterious and profound
As to escape understanding.
As they were beyond comprehension,
The description of them is surely perfunctory;
careful as if fording a river barefoot in winter;
vigilant and hesitant as if in fear of the attacks from neighbours;
formal as if they were guests;
polishedly flowing like melting ice;
simple and natural like the uncarved block;
vacant and deep like a valley;
turbid like muddy water;
quiet and calm like the great sea;
drifting as if they would never stop.
Who can end the muddiness
And make the muddy settle and gradually become clear?
Who can be at rest and yet, stirring, slowly come to life?
He who is in possession of this Tao
Will not seek completeness.
Just because he will not seek completeness,
He can be both old and new.

up

16

I try my best to be in an extreme emptiness of mind;
I try to keep myself in a state of stillness.
From the vigorous growth of all things I perceive the way they move in endless cycles.
All things, full of vitality,
Finally return to their own roots.
Returning to roots means stillness,
Also means a return to destiny.
A return to destiny is known as the law of eternity.
To understand the law is known as enlightening.
He who is ignorant of the law, if acting rashly,
Will be in great trouble.
But he who knows the law is tolerant,
And the tolerance leads to impartiality;
Impartiality to thoroughness;
Thoroughness to nature;
Nature to the Tao;
The Tao to eternity.
Thus he will not be endangered all his life.

up

17

The best ruler is unknown to his subjects;
Next comes the ruler loved and praised;
Next comes the ruler being feared;
Next comes the ruler disdained.
The lack of faith on the part of the ruler
Leads to the lack of confidence in him on the part of the people.
The best ruler is leisurely and carefree, seldom issuing orders.
When the state affairs are properly dealt with,
The people all say, "It should have happened to us like this."

up

18

The advocating of benevolence and rectitude
Stems from the disuse of the great Tao.
The great hypocrisy
Follows the emergence of cleverness and wisdom.
Filiality and benevolence come
Along with the family feud.
The loyal subjects show themselves
When the state is in great disorder.

up

19

Discard cleverness and wisdom
And the people will benefit themselves a hundredfold;
Discard benevolence and rectitude
And the people will again become filial and loyal;
Discard ingenuity and profit
And theft will no longer exist.
It is not enough to have these points as governing principles,
So the people must be made subject to the following:
Keep being simple in nature and mind,
Discard selfishness and weaken desires,
Discard cultural knowledge and worries will disappear.

up

20

How much difference is seen
Between Yes and No?
How much disparity is shown
Between good and evil?
What other people fear
One must fear;
What a difference - so vast and endless!
The multitude are jubilant
As if enjoying a magnificent feast
Or ascending a terrace to command a view of spring scene.
While I, alone and inactive, remain aloof and indifferent,
Like a baby that has not yet learned to smile;
I am tired, like a homeless wanderer.
The multitude all have more than enough,
While I, alone, seem to have nothing.
I am one, indeed, with a heart of a fool.
Vulgar people all look sober and complacent,
While I alone seem muddleheaded.
The multitude all appear clever and capable,
While I alone seem slow-witted and clumsy.
I am indeed different from them all
Because I take the greatest interest in obtaining the Tao.

up

21

The forms of the great the Teh (virtue)
Exclusively depend on the Tao.
The Tao as a thing
Is vague and indefinite.
Vague and indefinite,
It presents images;
Indefinite and vague,
It embodies substance.
Distant and dark,
It embraces semen-like essence.
The essence is a genuine existence
That can be tested as true.
From ancient times to now,
Its name has always been accepted,
And with which, the beginning of all things can be surveyed.
How do I know the initial state of all things?
By means of the Tao.

up

22

Bow down and you are preserved;
Bend and you can be straight;
Hollow, then full;
Worn, then new;
Seek a little and you get a lot;
Seek a lot and you get perplexed.
Thus the sage adheres to this One principle (Tao)
And regards it as the pattern of all things.
Show off yourself not and you become conspicuous;
Regard yourself not as infallible and you become illustrious;
Brag about yourself not and you gain achievement;
Boast of yourself not and you become a head.
One does not contend with others,
So nobody in the world can win him in contention.
The ancients' saying "Bow down and you are preserved"
Is surely not an empty saying,
Which can be really proved effective.

up

23

To be taciturn is in accordance with nature,
So much as a wanton wind
Does not last all morning,
And a sudden rain does not last all day.
Who makes it?
Heaven and earth.
If heaven and earth cannot make it last long,
How can man?
So a man of Tao conforms to the Tao;
A man of Teh to the Teh;
A man of having neither to the principle of losing both above.
He who conforms to the Tao is readily received by the Tao;
He who conforms to the Teh is readily received by the Teh;
He who conforms to the principle of losing both above is readily discarded by the principle of loss.
The lack of faith on the part of the ruler
Leads to the lack of confidence in him on the part of the people.

up

24

He who stands on tiptoes cannot stand well;
He who walks with great strides cannot walk well;
He who shows off himself cannot become conspicuous;
He who regards himself infallible cannot become illustrious;
He who brags about himself cannot gain achievement;
He who boasts of himself cannot become a head.
From the point of view of the Tao,
These behaviours are like leftover food and superfluous excrescence,
So disgusting that a man of Tao
Never behaves like that.

up

25

There is a thing integratedly formed
And born earlier than heaven and earth.
Silent and empty,
It relies on nothing,
Moving around for ever.
We may regard it as the mother of all things.
I do not know its name,
So I name it as the Tao,
And further name it as the Great.
The Great is moving forward without stopping,
Extending to the remotest distance,
And then returning to where it was.
That is why I say
The Tao is Great;
Heaven is Great;
Earth is Great;
And man is also Great.
There are four things that are Great,
Of them man is one.
Man takes earth as his model;
Earth takes heaven as its model;
Heaven takes the Tao as its model;
The Tao takes what is natural as its model.

up

26

Heaviness is the root of lightness.
Tranquillity is the lord of movement.
That is why the sage is always accompanied by his heavily laden cart
When he travels all day long.
Though he has a luxurious life to enjoy,
He never indulges himself in it.
Why should a ruler of ten thousand chariots
Take reckless action to govern the empire?
Lightness leads to the loss of the root;
Restlessness leads to the loss of the lord.

up

27

He who is good at walking leaves no traces;
He who is good at speaking leaves no slips;
He who is good at counting uses no counting tools;
He who is good at shutting renders all efforts of opening in vain though he uses no bolts;
He who is good at tying renders all efforts of untying in vain though he uses no ropes.
That is why the sage
Is always good at saving people
And abandoning no one;
That is why the sage is always good at saving things
And abandoning nothing.
This is called the intrinsic wisdom.
Thus the good man is the bad man's teacher;
The bad man is the material from which the good draws lessons.
If honouring not one's teacher,
Or loving not one's material,
One is a big fool though he seems clever.
Here lies the vital secret.

up

28

Though knowing what is masculine,
You are ready to play the role of female
And content to be a stream in the world.
Content to be a stream in the world,
You will be accompanied by the eternal virtue,
And return to being a baby.
Though knowing what is white,
You are ready to play the role of black,
And content to be a model of the world.
Content to be a model of the world,
You will be no longer at odds with the eternal virtue,
And return to the final truth.
Though knowing what is honor,
You are ready to play the role of the disgraced
And content to be a valley in the world.
Content to be a valley in the world,
You will no longer lack the eternal virtue,
And return to simplicity (Tao).
When simplicity gets shattered and becomes materialized,
The sage makes use of it to be the lord over other officials.
One should know
The greatest system is not separable.

up

29

He who wants to gain the kingship by force
Can never be successful, I think.
The kingship is so sacred
That cannot be obtained through force.
Those who try to obtain it by force will ruin it;
Those who keep it by force will lose it.
Because things are different:
Some go ahead or follow;
Some breathe gently or hard;
Some are strong or weak;
Some are in safety or in danger.
Hence the sage does away with extremity, extravagance and excess.

up

30

He who assists the ruler by means of the Tao
Does not conquer other countries by the military force.
Military actions usually invite retaliatory aftermath:
Wherever armies station,
Thistles and thorns grow;
A great war is always followed
By a great famine.
He who is well versed in the art of war
Only uses the force to win the war,
And not to bully or conquer other countries.
Win the war but do not boast;
Win the war but do not brag;
Win the war but do not show arrogance;
Win the war but do know it is out of necessity;
Win the war but do not thereby bully and conquer other countries.
Whatever is in its prime is bound to decline;
For, being in prime is against the Tao;
Whatever goes against the Tao
Will come to an early end.

up

31

Arms are tools of ill omen,
Detested by everybody.
And a man of the Tao does not use them.
The gentleman usually favours the left,
But when being at war, he favours the right.
Arms are tools of ill omen,
Not the instruments of the gentleman.
Even if compelled to use them,
The gentleman does not use them with pleasure.
Even if being the victor,
The gentleman does not glorify the victory.
He who glorifies the victory
Is such one as takes delight in killing.
He who takes delight in killing
Can never be successful in winning the empire.
On occasions of auspicious celebration the left is favoured;
On occasions of mourning the right is favoured.
A lieutenant's position is on the left;
A general's position is on the right.
That is to say, mourning rites should be observed in military operations.
War brings about heavy casualties,
So one should take part in it with deep sorrow.
When winning the victory, victors should treat the dead by observing the rites of mourning.

up

32

The Tao is nameless for ever.
Though it is very small,
It is subject to no one in the world.
If lords and kings can keep it,
They can bring all things in the world under subjection.
When the Yin and Yang between heaven and earth unite,
Sweet dew will fall, so equally scattered down
Without any interference on the part of the people.
The administration of the empire demands names;
Names are once given,
Limitations are thereby known.
The knowledge of limitations helps avoid danger.
The Tao is to the world what the river and the sea
Are to the countless streamlets.

up

33

He who knows others is wise;
He who knows himself is clever;
He who conquers others is forceful;
He who conquers himself is powerful;
He who knows contentment is rich;
He who perseveres is a man of will;
He who does not lose his root can endure;
He whose Tao survives him is long-lived.

up

34

The great Tao is felt everywhere
Extending in all directions.
All things grow on it and it never declines them.
It accomplishes its great task without claiming to merit.
It breeds all things without claiming to be their master;
It can be called the Small.
All things finally return to it
And it never claims to be their master;
And it can be called the Great.
It becomes the Great
Because it never claims to be the Great.

up

35

He who holds the great image (Tao)
Attracts all the people to him.
Coming to him and not harming each other,
They all live in peace and happiness.
Music and food
Can allure passersby to stop,
But the Tao, coming out of the mouth,
Is tasteless.
It cannot be seen,
It cannot be heard,
But when using it, you can never exhaust its use.

up

36

If you want a thing to contract,
You should stretch it first;
If you want a thing weakened,
You should strengthen it first;
If you want a thing gotten rid of,
You should promote it first;
If you want a thing taken away,
You should give to it first.
These are called subtle wisdom.
The supple and weak overcomes the rigid and strong.
Fish should not be allowed to leave the deep water;
The instruments of power of a state
Should not be shown to the public.

up

37

The Tao always remains inactive,
Yet it acts upon everything in the world.
If lords and kings can keep it,
All creatures will grow and develop naturally.
When desires are kindled in the growth and development,
I can suppress them with the nameless Simplicity of the Tao.
Once I do so
Desires will be repressed.
Once desires are repressed,
The whole world will be naturally at peace.

up

38

A man of the great virtue (Teh) does not claim to be of virtue,
Thus he is of the true virtue.
A man of the small virtue always holds fast to the virtue in form,
Thus he is actually of no virtue.
A man of the great virtue remains inactive,
Without deliberately manifesting his virtue;
A man of the small benevolence keeps being active,
Always deliberately manifesting his virtue.
A man of the great benevolence acts but never deliberately shows his benevolence;
A man of great justice acts and also deliberately shows his justice;
A man of rigid rites acts and even rolls up his sleeves to force people to conform to rites when no one responds to him.
Therefore
Virtue comes after the loss of Tao;
Benevolence comes after the loss of virtue;
Justice comes after the loss of benevolence;
Rites come after the loss of justice.
Thus rites result from the lack of loyalty and good faith,
And function as the beginning of the great disorder.
Foresight is only the flowery embellishment of the Tao
As well as the beginning of ignorance.
Hence the true man sets store by the thick rather than by the thin,
And values the fruit rather than the flower.
That is why he takes the former and discards the latter.

up

39

Among the ancient holders of the One:
Heaven that holds the One becomes clear and bright;
Earth that holds the One becomes steady;
Gods that hold the One become efficacious;
Valleys that hold the One become full;
All creatures that hold the One become alive;
Lords and leaders who hold the One become leaders of the human world.
By inference Heaven might split without what makes it clear and bright;
Earth might shake without what makes it steady;
Gods might disappear without what makes them efficacious;
Valleys might go dry without what makes them full;
All creatures might die out without what makes them alive;
Lords and kings might fall without what makes them leaders.
That is why the humble is the root of the noble,
And the high is based on the low.
That is why lords and kings call themselves "the solitary", "the few" and "the unkind".
Does not this take the humble as the root (of the noble)?
Does this not?
Hence the highest honor does not need honoring.
It is better, therefore, to be a hard stone than a beautiful piece of jade.

up

40

Cycling is the movement of the Tao;
Being weak is the function of the Tao.
All things of the world are born from the Being,
And the Being from the Nothingness.

up

41

Hearing the Tao, the best scholar assiduously practices it;
The average scholar half believes and half doubts it;
The worst scholar bursts into laughter about it.
If the worst scholar does not laugh about it,
The Tao is not worthy of being called the Tao.
That is why the ancients say:
The bright Tao seems dark;
The advancing Tao seems to be retreating;
The even Tao seems rough;
The great virtue resembles the valley;
The pure whiteness seems black;
The infinite virtue seems lacking;
The virile virtue seems idle;
The pure simplicity seems turbid;
The great square has no corners;
Of the utensils the most precious takes the longest time to be finished;
The great sound seems soundless;
The great image seems formless.
The Tao always conceals itself without a name,
But it is the Tao alone that helps and completes everything.

up

42

The Tao begets the One;
The One consists of Two in opposition (the Yin and Yang);
The Two begets the Three;
The Three begets all things of the world.
All things connote the Yin and Yang.
The Yin and Yang keep acting upon each other
And thus things keep changing and unifying themselves.
Words like "the solitary", "the few" and "the unkind"
Are usually detested by people,
Yet lords and kings use them to call themselves.
That is why
A thing is sometimes added to when being reduced,
Or is reduced when being added to.
So I teach what I am taught:
"The violent will not come to a good end."
This I will take as the first lesson when I teach.

up

43

The most supple in the world
Can go through the hardest in the world.
What consists of no substance can enter what has no crevices.
I thus know the benefit of inaction.
Teaching without words,
The benefit of inaction,
Are what few people in the world can perform and obtain.

up

44

Which is dearer, your name or your body?
Which is more important, your body or your goods?
Which is more harmful, gain or loss?
Excessive stinginess will result in great expense;
Too much amassment leads to great loss;
Knowing contentment avoids disgrace;
Knowing when to stop avoids danger.
Thus one can be long in safety.

up

45

The complete perfection seems flawed,
But its use can never be exhausted;
The fullest seems empty,
But its use can never come to an end;
The straightest seems bent;
The most skillful seems clumsy;
The most eloquent seems tongue-tied.
Movement overcomes cold;
Quiet overcomes heat.
So inaction and quiet help one
Become a leader of the world.

up

46

When the Tao prevails in the world,
The battle steeds are returned to farmers for tilling the fields;
When the Tao does not prevail in the world,
Even pregnant mares are taken over for wars.
No crime is greater than greediness;
No disaster is greater than the lack of contentment;
Thus the contentment of feeling content
Is an eternal contentment.

up

47

Without stirring out of the house,
One can know everything in the world;
Without looking out of the window,
One can see the Tao of heaven.
The further one travels,
The less one knows.
That is why the sage
Knows everything without going out;
Sees the Tao of heaven without looking out of the window;
Succeeds without resorting to action.

up

48

He who seeks learning must increase his knowledge every day;
He who seeks the Tao must reduce his knowledge every day;
He reduces and reduces until he reaches the state of inaction.
When reaching the state of inaction, one can succeeds in everything.
To govern the world well, one must take inaction as the principle.
If one governs with too much action, one is not a worthy governor.

up

49

The sage often has no will,
He takes the people's will as his own.
What is good I treat with goodness;
What is not good I also treat with goodness.
Thus I obtain goodness.
Those who are of faith, I put faith in;
Those who are of no faith, I also put faith in.
Thus I obtain faith.
When the sage governs the world,
He simplifies his as well as the people's minds.
The people are all preoccupied with their eyes and ears,
The sage helps them return to the childhood state.

up

50

Men live when given to birth
And die when being buried.
One third of them are long-lived;
One third of them are short-lived;
One third of them die from their own choices though they could have lived longer;
Why in such cases?
Because they are too eager to live longer.
It is heard that he who is good at preserving his life
Does not meet with the rhinoceros or tiger when traveling on land,
Nor is he wounded in war,
For the rhinoceros has no use for its horns
And the tiger has no use for its claws;
The weapons have no use for their blades.
Why in such cases?
Because there is no realm of death for him to enter.

up

51

The Tao begets all creatures;
The virtue rears them;
Substance gives them shape;
Forces in opposition accomplish them.
Therefore all creatures worship the Tao and honor virtue.
This worship and honor stems from the fact
That the Tao and virtue never unnaturally
Impose their influence on all creatures.
In this way
The Tao begets all creatures;
The virtue rears them,
Promotes them, natures them,
Brings them to fruition and maturity,
Meanwhile maintains and defends them.
Giving them life without claiming to be their owner;
Availing them without claiming to be their benefactor;
And being their head without ruling them;
All these are called the most intrinsic Teh (virtue).

up

52

The universe has a beginning (Tao);
The beginning functions as the mother of all things.
If you know the mother,
You can get to know her children (all things);
If, while knowing the children,
You keep the mother,
You will be a sage all your life.
Block the openings (of knowledge),
Shut the door (of desires),
And you will be free from illness all your life.
Unlock the openings,
Add to your cares,
And you will be incurable all your life.
To be able to perceive the minute is called discernment;
To be able to play the role of the weak is called the strong.
Use the light
To return to the intrinsic discernment
And you will be free from disasters.
This is called the eternal Tao.

up

53

If I have acquired a little knowledge,
I will be afraid of going astray
When I walk on the road.
The road is even,
Yet people prefer to take by-paths.
While the court is corrupt,
The fields lie waste;
The granaries are empty;
There are persons who are still dressed gaudily,
Wearing ornamented swords,
Satiated with fine food and drink,
In possession of extravagant goods.
They can be called the chieftains of robbers.
What a phenomenon against the Tao!

up

54

What is well planted cannot be pulled out;
What is well held cannot be disengaged;
The principle being observed,
The offering of sacrifice by descendants will be kept making for ever.
Similarly cultivating the principle in oneself,
One can purify his virtue;
Cultivating it in the family,
One makes his own virtue more than enough;
Cultivating it in the village,
One can have the virtue to be the leader;
Cultivating it in the state,
One can have the prodigious virtue;
Cultivating it in the world,
One can have the virtue widely known.
Hence I can have an insight
Into other individuals by examining myself;
Into other families by examining my family;
Into other villages by examining my village;
Into other states by examining my state;
Into other worlds by examining my world.
How do I know about the whole world?
By employing the method above.

up

55

A man of prodigious virtue is just like a newly-born baby:
Poisonous insects will not sting it;
Beasts of prey will not harm it;
Birds of prey will not swoop down upon it.
Its bones and muscles are weak and supple,
Yet its hold is tight.
It does not know sexual intercourse between the male and female,
Yet its little penis often erects itself;
This is because it is at the height of virility.
It cries all day long,
Yet its throat does not become hoarse;
This is because it is at the height of harmonious vim and vigor.
To know harmony is to know the law of unity;
To know the law of unity is to know discernment;
To indulge in sensual pleasures is to look for disasters;
To let virility driven by desires is to give free rein to strength.
A creature in its prime is at the turning-point of being old,
For it is against the Tao.
What is against the Tao comes to an early end.

up

56

He who is wise will not speak;
He who speaks is not wise.
When one blocks the openings (of knowledge),
Shuts the door (of desires),
Dulls sharpness,
Stays away from entanglements,
Glows with veiled radiance,
Mingles with dust,
That is called subtle identification.
Hence you are in no way
To be friends with him,
To estrange him,
To benefit him,
To harm him,
To honor him,
To debase him.
That is why he is held in esteem in the world.

up

57

Rule the state with peace and inaction;
Wage a war with crafty tricks;
Governing the world by not troubling the people.
How do I know it is the right way?
The reason is as follows:
The more prohibitions there are in the world,
The poorer the people;
The more weapons the people own,
The more chaotic the state;
The more skills the people have,
The more strange things occur;
The more laws and orders are issued,
The more thieves and robbers there are.
Thus the sage says,
If I prefer inaction,
The people will naturally crave for peace;
If I act little,
The people will be naturally rectified;
If I am not meddlesome,
The people will naturally become rich;
If I get rid of desires,
The people will naturally become simple.

up

58

When the governor is magnanimous,
The people will become simple;
When the governor is harsh,
The people will become cunning.
Disaster hides itself behind good fortune;
Good fortune leans against disaster.
Who knows the secret?
There is no definite answer.
The normal changes into the abnormal;
The good changes into the evil.
People have been long perplexed.
Thus the sage is square and upright
But does not wound the people;
He is edged but does not cut the people;
He is candid but does not behave wantonly;
He gives light but does not dazzle.

up

59

The best way to govern the state and keep in good health
Is to stint vitality.
To stint vitality means to attempt an early preparation;
The early preparation means to keep accumulating virtue;
Keep accumulating virtue and one can become all-conquering;
Be all-conquering and one's power will be beyond measure;
When one's power is beyond measure,
He can be entrusted with the duty of defending the state.
When there is the principle of governing the state,
The government can long endure.
This is called the Tao of deep roots and sturdy stems
By which one can live and see longer time.

up

60

Ruling a large state resembles frying a small fish
(It is inappropriate to turn it over frequently).
When the Tao prevails in the world,
Even ghosts and spirits become harmless.
It is not that ghosts become harmless
But that their potencies can no longer harm people.
Not only ghosts become harmless,
Sages harm no people either.
Hence neither does any harm to the people
And both sages and ghosts help the people to enjoy the benefit of virtue.

up

61

A large state should play the role of female,
Just like the lowest reaches of a river
Where all the other streams meet.
The female always conquers the male by motionlessness,
Because the motionless female always takes the lower position.
Hence the large state can annex the small one by taking the lower position (being modest);
The small state can gain the trust of the large one by taking the lower position,
The case being either the former or vice versa.
The large state wants to put the small one under its protection,
The small state wants to be shielded by the large one,
Thus both can satisfy their wishes,
But the large state should be more willing to take the lower position.

up

62

The Tao is the innermost recess of all things;
It is what the good man cherishes
As well as what the bad man wants to keep.
With the Tao, beautiful words can buy respect;
Beautiful deeds can be highly regarded.
How can the bad man desert the Tao?
Hence when the emperor ascends the throne and appoints three ducal ministers,
It would be better to present to the emperor the Tao than jade disks followed by a team of four horses.
Why did ancients value the Tao so much?
Was it not said that by making use of the Tao
One could get what one desired
Or avoid punishment when committing an offense?
That is why it is valued so mush in the world.

up

63

Act by means of inaction;
Deal with matters by means of not being meddlesome;
Taste by means of tastelessness.
The big stems from the small;
The many is based on the few.
To overcome the difficult should begin with the easy;
To accomplish what is big should begin with the small.
The difficult things in the world must originate in the easy;
The big things in the world must take root in the small.
That is why the sage can accomplish what is great by never attempting to be great.
Light promise-giving, light promise-breaking;
The easier one considers things, the more difficult things become.
That is why the sage never meets with difficulty
Because he always considers things difficult.

up

64

A stable situation is easy to be maintained;
A condition without the sign of apparent change is easy to be coped with;
A fragile thing is easy to break;
A minute thing is easy to dissolve.
The proper treatment should be given to what has happened;
Keep things in order before disorder sets in.
A huge tree grows from a tiny seedling;
A nine-storey terrace rises from a mound of earth;
A journey of a thousand li starts from beneath one's feet.
Those who wants to obtain it by force will ruin it;
Those who hold it by force will lose it.
Thus the sage never ruins anything,
Because of his inaction;
He never loses anything.
In doing things,
People often fail on the verge of success.
If they are as prudent at the end as at the beginning,
They will never fail.
That is why the sage
Desires what others do not desire,
Values not rare goods,
Learns to lack learning,
Makes up for people's faults.
In this way he helps all things develop naturally
And refrains from interfering in them.

up

65

Those ancient men of the profound Tao
Did not use the Tao to enlighten the people
But use the Tao to make them simple.
The people are unruly
Because they are too clever.
Thus to govern a state by cleverness
Is bound to ruin the state;
Not to govern the state by cleverness
Is a blessing to the state.
These are two models of government;
Keeping the knowledge of these two models
Is known as the mysterious virtue.
The mysterious virtue is profound and far-reaching,
Running counter to concrete things.
At their extremes there is the most complete conformity to nature.

up

66

All the streamlets flow towards the river and the sea
Because the latter takes the lower positions,
Hence the latter becomes the king of countless valleys.
Therefore, if one wants to be the ruler of the people,
One must put oneself behind the people.
Thus the sage, though being placed high over the people,
Never burdens the people;
The sage, though going ahead of the people,
Never stands in the way of the people.
That is why the people hold him in esteem
And are never tired of him.
He contends with no one,
So no one in the world is able to contend with him.

up

67

The whole world says that my Tao is great,
Resembling nothing concrete,
Resembling nothing concrete,
Just because it is great.
If it resembled anything concrete,
It would have long become minute.
I have three magic weapons
Which I hold and treasure:
The first is mercy;
The second is thrift;
The third is unwillingness to take the lead in the world.
Being merciful, one can be brave;
Being thrifty, one can be generous;
Being unwilling to take the lead in the world, one can become the leader of the world.
Now seeking bravery by giving up mercy,
Seeking generosity by giving up thrift,
Seeking advance by giving up retreat,
One is bound to end in death.
Being merciful, one will triumph in the offensive
And be impregnable in defense.
If heaven wants to save one,
It must save him with mercy.

up

68

He who is good at being a commander
Does not display his bravery;
He who is good at fighting
Does not burst into anger;
He who is good at defeating his enemy
Does not brace himself to engage in a tough battle;
He who is good at employing men
Humbles himself before them;
This is called the virtue of non-contention;
This is called making use of others' strength;
This is called conformability to the Tao of heaven.

up

69

A strategist says:
I dare not launch an attack but strengthen defense capabilities;
I dare not advance an inch but retreat a foot instead.
This means to deploy battle array by showing no battle array;
To wield one's arm to attack by showing no arm to lift;
To face the enemy by showing no enemy to attack;
To hold weapons by showing no weapons to hold.
No disaster is greater than underestimating the enemy.
Underestimating the enemy nearly cost me my treasure (i. e. three treasured weapons, see 67).
That is why the sorrow-laden side wins
When two armies are at war.

up

70

My words are very easy to understand,
And very easy to put into practice,
Yet there should have been no one in the world
Who can understand them
Or can put them into practice.
Words must be purpose-oriented,
Deeds must be reasonably grounded.
People cannot understand me
Because they fail to understand what is said above.
Those who understand me are few;
Those who can follow my advice are even less.
That is why the sage
Is always dressed in coarse cloth
But conceals about him a beautiful piece of jade (the Tao).

up

71

Knowing one's ignorance of certain knowledge is the best attitude;
Not knowing certain knowledge yet pretending to know is a bad attitude.
The sage is of no shortcoming,
Because he considers shortcoming as shortcoming.
He considers shortcoming as shortcoming,
Thus he has no shortcoming.

up

72

When the people are not afraid of the threatening might of the authority,
The great tumult will soon ensue.
Do not harass their living places;
Do not deprive them of their means of livelihood.
If you do not oppress the people,
The people will not be tired of you (the ruler).
Hence the sage knows himself but does not praise himself;
loves himself but does not honor himself.
That is why he discards the latter and takes the former.

up

73

Bravery in being bold leads to death;
Bravery in being timid leads to life.
These two kinds of bravery,
One leads to good the other to harm,
Who knows why
Heaven hates what it hates?
Even the sage feels it difficult to understand.
This is the Tao of heaven:
To excel in triumphing by means of non-contention;
To be good at answering by means of taciturnity;
To attract people by using no summons;
To be quick in planning by acting slowly.
The net of heaven is spread wide and far,
Though the mesh is largely knit,
Nothing can slip through the net.

up

74

When the people are not afraid of death,
What is the point of threatening them with death?
Should the people really fear death,
Who dare go against laws
If we put to death those who do evils?
It is the duty of a regular executioner to kill,
If one wants to kill on behalf of the executioner,
It is like chopping wood on behalf of the master carpenter.
There are few who can escape cutting their own hands
When they chop wood on behalf of the master carpenter.

up

75

The hunger on the part of the people
Is the result of exorbitant taxes on the part of the ruler;
Thus the people are hungry.
The unruliness on the part of the people
Is the result of meddlesome actions on the part of the ruler;
Thus the people are unruly.
Making light of life on the part of the people
Is the result of setting too much store by life on the part of the ruler;
Thus the people make light of life.
Those who make light of their own life
Are wiser than those who overvalue their life.

up

76

While alive, a man's body is supple;
When dead, it becomes hard.
While alive, grass and trees are supple;
When dead, they become dry and stiff.
Thus the hard and strong is of the dying sort;
The supple and weak is of the living sort.
That is why the army, having grown strong, will be wiped out,
And the tree, when grown up, will be cut down.
Thus the strong and big is inferior
To the weak and supple.

up

77

Does not the Tao of heaven resemble the bending of a bow (aiming):
Pressing down the high,
Lifting up the low,
Reducing the excessive,
Compensating the deficient?
So the Tao of heaven means to compensate the deficient by reducing the excess.
The Tao of man is different:
It gives to one who already has more than enough by taking from one who is in want.
Who can offer what he has in excess to the people?
Only the man of Tao.
Thus the sage
Benefits all things without claiming to be their benefactor;
Succeeds without claiming credit;
Because he does not want to show off his wisdom.

up

78

Nothing in the world is more supple than water,
Yet nothing is more powerful than water in attacking the hard and strong.
Why?
Because nothing can take its place.
Everyone in the world knows
That the weak is more powerful than the strong,
That the supple is more rigid than the hard,
Yet no one so far can put the knowledge into practice.
That is why the sage says,
Only he who can bear the humiliation on behalf of the state
Can be called the great priest of the state;
Only he who dare shoulder the responsibility for the calamity of the state
Can be called the king of the state.
Factual words seem ironical.

up

79

When the great enmity is allayed,
There must be some remaining hostility;
Even if one requites hostility with kindness,
How can that be considered perfect?
Therefore the sage keeps the stub of the receipt for a loan
But never presses for payment from people.
A man of virtue is as tolerant as the sage who keeps the stub of the receipt;
A man of no virtue is as harsh as tax collectors.
The Tao of heaven never shows favouritism;
It always helps those who are good.

up

80

The state should be small;
The population should be sparse.
Tools, though of many kinds,
Should not be used.
Teach the people to fear death
And not to migrate to remote places;
Although they have ships and carts,
They will have no need to use them;
Although they are well armed with weapons,
They will have no place to make them effective.
Encourage the people to return to the condition
Under which the knotted rope was used to record things.
The world best ruled is a place where
The people will have delicious food,
beautiful clothes,
comfortable living quarters,
cheerful customs.
Though within easy reach of neighbouring states,
The dog's barking and the cock's crowing in one state are heard in another;
The people of one state will never have dealings with those of another,
Even if they get old and die.

up

81

True words are not embellished,
The embellished words are not true.
A good man does not quibble;
He who quibbles is not good.
A man of true learning does not show off his learning;
He who shows off his learning does not have true learning.
The sage does not store up.
Helping others as best as he can,
He is helped even more.
Giving others as much as he can,
He becomes richer and richer still.
The Tao of heaven benefits rather than harms all things;
The Tao of the sage is to give rather than rob the people.