1

Dao that can be talked about is not the eternal Dao itself;
A name that can be given is not the eternal thing itself.
The nameless existed
Before the birth of birth of Heaven and Earth - Universe;
The names which were given were after
The birth of All Things.
By the eternity of unknown existence
Comprehend the common essence of things;
By the eternity of Existence
Observe the apparent differences.
These two came from the same origin - the unknown,
But with different names.
They all are called the "profoundness",
Profoundly and profoundly it is the entrance
From which come all wonders.

up

2

When the whole world recognizes that beauty is beautiful,
It may be not beautiful at all.
When the whole world recognizes that goodness is good,
It may not be good at all.
Thus, existence and nonexistence produce each other.
The high and the low are compared with each other.
The long and the short show off each other.
The high and the low compliment each other.
The front and the rear follow each other.
Thus the Sage ruler administered state affairs by non-interference and carried out education by non-preaching.
All things are resolved in order and nothing is rejected.
It produces All Things but it does not possess them.
It provides everything for them but it does not take anything from them.
He accomplished deeds for them, but he did not claim the deeds.
Since he did not claim the deeds, they did not leave him.

up

3

Promote no exalted persons, thus enabling the people to cease competition.
Prize no rare goods, thus enabling the people to cease robbery.
Don't display desirable things.
Let people's minds be undisturbed.
A Sage ruler enabled them to be tranquil in their hearts;
be filled in their stomachs;
be weakened in their ambitions;
be strengthened in their will.
He made them less intelligent and less desirous.
If intelligent people are made afraid of doing wrong, then no one in the world can not be governed.

up

4

Dao is charged to produce these gases into orderly use.
The eternal capacity will never overflow.
Profoundly!
It is the ancestor of All Things!
It blunts all sharpness;
it settles all disputes;
it harmonizes all lights and it unites all lands.
The clear mind will be constantly receptive.
We do not know whose descent it is.
It existed before all phenomena and all lives.

up

5

Heaven and earth are not benevolent because they make All Things sacrificial victims.
Sage rulers were not benevolent because they punished the people as sacrificial victims.
Between the heavens and the earth there is nothing but an empty space!
It may be compared to a bellow or pocket of vast capacity.
Humbly modest but not submissive.
The more it moves, changes, the more nearly perfect it becomes.
Excess means Extreme.
It is better to hold fast to perfection.

up

6

The unlimited capacity of valleys;
the unbelievable power of Spirits;
and the unending life of immortality are called the Profound Origin Mother.
The beginning of the Profound Origin Mother is the root of Heaven and Earth.
Endlessly, endlessly!
It is existing.
Yet its usefulness is invisible.

up

7

Heaven is enduring and earth is lasting.
Why heaven and earth can be enduring and lasting is because they do not live for themselves, thus, they can endure and last.
So that a Sage ruler put himself behind others, and he came to the front;
he excluded himself from struggle with others and he survived.
It is because he was selfless that he fulfilled himself.

up

8

Perfect excellence is like gentle water.
Gentle water benefits All Things and yet it does not struggle.
Do away with what all people hate.
Thus this is approaching Dao.
Give to what is of perfect personnel.
Stay in a perfect place,
think in a perfect way,
cooperate with perfect people,
speak perfect truth,
govern in perfect order,
work for perfect potentiality,
move when the time is perfect.
Because of non-struggle, therefore, there is no blame.

up

9

Do not concentrate one's wealth in abundance.
It is far better for one to know where to stop.
Do not beat one's sword sharp, one can never keep its edge for ever.
If their houses are full of gold and jade, they have no way to keep them forever.
If they are proud of having great riches and honors, they just make more troubles for themselves.
When merits have been achieved, fame has been completed - one may withdraw himself.
That is to follow the law of Nature.

up

10

By keeping the body and soul balanced, they can not be split.
By soft breathing and being tender, one can be innocent.
By purifying the mind and broadening views, one can be free from errors.
By loving the people and serving the country, one should not interfere.
If one's mind is indecisive, one should make it inactive.
By thoroughly understanding all angles, one can discard dogmatism.
It gives life, nourishes them.
It produces all things but it does not possess them.
It provides everything for them but it does not take anything from them.
It leads them but does not lord over them.
This is called the "incomprehensive Virtues".

up

11

To combine two thirty-spoke wheels makes a cart.
Where there is a capacity in it, it possesses the function of a cart.
A lump of clay can be made into pottery.
Where there is a capacity within it, it possesses the function of a vessel.
A house is built with windows and doors.
Where there is a capacity in it, it possesses the function of a house.
Thus to possess a thing is for its utility, while its capacity is its function.

up

12

Five excessive colors make people blind;
five excessive sounds make people deaf;
five excessive flavors rob people's taste;
racing and hunting make people mad;
and rare goods make people steal.
Thus a Sage ruler took care of people's basic-needs (stomachs), not their excessive-desires (luxuries).
Thus he eliminated desires and supplied needs.

up

13

Yet, honor and dishonor cause the same excitement.
Pleasure and worry affect the same body.
What does it mean by "honor and dishonor cause the same excitement"?
People look up to honor and look down upon dishonor.
They are excited when they get the honor;
they also are excited when they lose the honor.
What does it mean by "the great worry of man is because of love for self"?
The reason that we have worry is because we have ourselves.
If we could forget ourselves, what else remains to be our worry?
Hence, if one loves the world as much as himself, he may be able to rule the world.
If one treasures the world as much as himself, he may be trusted with the world.

up

14

Look at it, but it cannot be seen, it is called "the shapeless".
Listen to it, but it cannot be heard, it is called "the soundless".
Grasp it, but it cannot be held, it is called "the bodyless".
These three characteristics are incomprehensible, yet they uniquely constitute the oneness of Dao.
Look upward, it is not clear.
Look downward, it is not dim.
Continuously, continuously!
We are unable to trace it's original name because it returns to the state of Unknown existence.
It is called "the formless form" and "the imageless image".
That is why it is called "the indistinct and elusive".
To embrace Dao from ancient times is to know the original causes of the past in order to control what is going on in the present.
This is called "the Law of Dao".

up

15

The ancient scholar knew how to be perfect:
keep himself subtle, wonderful, profound and flexible.
He kept his mind so deep that it could not be fathomed!
Because it could not be fathomed, it could only be described superficially:
Hesitatingly, like one who is crossing a stream in winter;
Timidly, like one who is new to his surrounding neighbors;
Reservedly, like a new guest;
Yieldingly, like ice which is melting;
Honest, like Pure Matter;
Obscure, like muddy water;
and Capacious, like a deep valley.
Who can calmly make the muddy (chaotic) clear (orderly)?
Who can calmly change the static (matter) into dynamic (force)?
To return to Dao is to let the capacity of mind not be over-filled.
Only the mind which is not over-filled can renew the old and perfect the new.

up

16

To have the greatest capacity of mind, keep it quiet and patient,
All things are resolved in order,
In order to understand the merit of Return.
While individual things are growing simultaneously yet all of them will return eventually to the original root (Pure Matter).
To return toward the original root is to see the static phenomenon.
To see the static phenomenon is to know the original order.
To know the original order is to know the eternal law.
If one does not know the eternal law and acts only by means of trial and error he will end in disaster.
By knowing the eternal law one can have capacity;
by having capacity one can be impartial;
by being impartial one can be perfect;
being perfect one can be superior;
by being superior one can be eternal;
and by being eternal one can approach Dao.
There will be no discontinuation of life, even though a human body will die.

up

17

The highest rule is that the people are not aware of being ruled.
The next is that they love and praise it.
The last is what they fear and defy.
Truth alone is not enough, some truth is not always true.
It is still better to have Economy of Words.
After personal duties were accomplished, and the state affairs were satisfied - all people said "He is natural".

up

18

When the superior Dao was lost, benevolence and righteousness were created.
When intelligence and skills prevailed, superior hypocrisy was displayed.
When family relations were not in harmony, filial piety and parental kindness were encouraged.
When a country was in disorder and justice failed, loyalty and reliability were required.

up

19

Abandon sagacity and drop intelligence, the welfare of people can be increased hundredfold;
abandon benevolence and drop righteousness, the people will rejoice in filial piety and parental love;
abandon crafts and profits, robbers and thieves will cease to exist.
These three are remedies for artificial civilization.
They can never bring about satisfaction:
people should be led to, where they belong - The Nature.
He stopped research, reduced desires, sought plainness, and embraced original simplicity.

up

20

Abandon learning, there will be no worry!
What is the real meaning between Yes and No?
What is the clear distinction between good and bad?
What all men fear, one has to fear.
Most people are busy, busy and never know where to stop.
Most people are happy-go-lucky, as though they are attending a great feast or as though they are ascending a tower for sight-seeing in spring time.
My desire has not yet even started, like an infant who has not yet become a child.
They are rushing and rushing, and never know where to rest.
Most people desire more;
I alone prefer less.
I am simple,
Pure and calm.
Most people feel bright, bright;
I alone seem to be dull.
Most people are searching, searching;
I alone keep quiet, quiet.
Like a calm ocean moving without end.
Most people feel that they have merits;
I alone feel myself useless and worthless.
I alone am different from others and still prefer to drink mother's milk.

up

21

The capacity of Grand Virtues is obtained only by following Dao.
Dao is a matter, even though it is indistinct and elusive.
It is elusive and indistinct, yet within it All Images are formed;
It is indistinct and elusive, yet within it All Things are created;
It is shadowy and obscure, yet within it All Vitalities are produced.
It's own vitality is real and valid.
Throughout the past and present the name of Dao has never been dropped.
It observes All Origins.
How do we know that All Origins are so?
By these observations.

up

22

Through tolerance can perfection be attained.
By "indirect way" can "direct way" be reached.
Through lowness can highness be maintained.
Through old fashion can new fashion be created.
By "have less" can "have more" be possible.
By having plenty only confusion will result.
Hence one who does not show off is enlightened.
One who does not boast of himself has merit.
One who does not claim credit for himself is popular.
One who does not brandish his success thus leads all.
Because of non-struggle, therefore there is nothing under heaven which can struggle with him.
The ancient saying:
"Through tolerance can perfection be attained."
Is it an empty talk?
Thus, if one attains perfection everything under heaven will follow him.

up

23

Let us observe nature:
A heavy rain can hardly outlast the morning;
a violent hurricane can hardly outlast the day.
Who is responsible for this?
The Heaven and the earth - the Nature.
If the Heaven and the earth however can not make things great and lasting, how could a man expect to do even more?
Thus one who practices Dao is in accord with Dao.
One who is in accord with virtues thus attains virtues.
One who is not in accord with Dao loses Dao.
One who is not in accord with virtues loses virtues.
Truth alone is not enough, nevertheless some truth is not true.

up

24

One on tiptoe can not stand well.
One with hard breathing can not live long.
One astride can not walk well.
A self-displayer is not enlightened.
A self-asserter is not popular.
A self-approver has no merit.
A self-boaster can not lead.
From the point of view of Dao this is called "surfeit of food and a tumour on the body".
It is hated by everything!
Thus a man of Dao will never resort to it.

up

25

There was something unique manifesting from chaos before the birth of Heaven and Earth.
Remotely!
It stands alone without deviation!
Cyclically!
It moves without an end!
It may be called the mother of the Heaven and the Earth.
We do not know its eternal name but give it the name Dao.
Constrained to give a name, it may be called "Movement".
After moving it is called "Departure".
After departing it is called "Extreme".
To avoid remaining in the extreme, it may be called "Return".
Dao is superior;
the universe is superior;
the world is superior;
and the ruler is superior.
There are four superiors in existence among which the ruler is one.
Thus, the ruler should follow the law of the world.
The world should follow the law of the universe.
The universe should follow the law of Dao.
Dao follows its own law - the law of Nature.

up

26

Heaviness is the cause of lightness.
Serenity is the effect of restlessness.
Therefore, a commanding officer does not risk parting with his supply trains even for a single day journey.
Even though he had honors and respect from others, he stayed at ease and on high.
How could a ruler of "ten thousand chariots" (the King), take a risk lightly before the world?
To be light will then lose the effect.

up

27

The perfect traveler does not need a trail.
The perfect speaker does not leave any argument.
The perfect planner does not need a sketch.
The perfect door does not need a latch.
The perfect binder does not need string.
Hence Sage rulers always perfectly saved people, thus nobody was abandoned;
and always perfectly saved things, thus nothing was wasted.
This is called "blocking enlightenment".
The good person is the teacher of the bad person.
A bad person is a lesson for the good person.
Esteem the teacher and be aware of the lesson.
Otherwise even though one is intelligent, he will be misguided.
These are the marvelous functions of Dao.

up

28

Know what is the Male - Positive and know what is the Female - Negative.
Be a servant of the world, be a servant of the world, by never departing from virtues in order to lead the world to return to the state of innocent infancy.
Know what is known and reserve what is unknown.
Be a model of the world, be a model of the world, by never failing to attain virtues in order to lead the world to return to a state of "void" - trouble free.
Know what is honorable and know what is dishonorable.
Be the destiny of the world, be the destiny of the world, by constantly accumulating virtues in order to return again to purity Pure Matter.
Ever since Pure Matter purity was changed into civilization,
Sage rulers have used officials as the instruments of rule.
The superior system of rule may exercise no division.

up

29

Will anybody want to lead the world according to his selfish design?
I see that he will never attain his end.
The sacred instrument of the world cannot be grasped or intervened:
one who intervenes will be defeated;
one who grasps will lose it.
Among things:
some are moving ahead, others are following behind;
some are breathing in air, others are breathing in water;
some are strong, others are weak;
some are still carried on and some are dropped.
Therefore, a Sage ruler avoided:
Extreme, Extravagance and Indulgence.

up

30

A ruler who is in accord with Dao will never use military force to override the world,
Because this kind of affair ensures reciprocal killing.
Once an army has operated in the field there is nothing left growing but thorny bushes.
Once a great war is over, invariably there are horrible years following.
The perfect fighter is decisive, yet he does not allow himself to be violent.
Decisive but not proud;
decisive but not boastful and decisive when he is obliged to fight.
Be decisive but not aggressive.
A matured living body will soon grow old.
That is called "aberration of Dao".
Aberration of Dao will cause early death.

up

31

War is an unlucky instrument.
It is hated by everything!
Thus a man of Dao will never resort to use it.
A position taken by a gentle official is on the right - honorable side;
the position taken by a war conductor is on the left - less honorable side.
War is an unlucky instrument, it is not the instrument of a gentle ruler.
They are obligated to die and utilized by the authority.
To keep calm and have peace of mind is to be superior.
Victory of war is not delightful:
if one delights in war, he delights in killing people;
if one delights in killing people, it will never be possible for him to be at peace with the world.
Thus on happy occasions the right side is honored.
On sad occasions the left side is honored.
During a war, many people are killed,
It should be taken mournfully.
Even a victory should be treated as a funeral.

up

32

The eternity of Dao has no name:
Even though Pure Matter is infinitely small, its function is so superior that it is next to none,
If rulers can follow the model of nature, everything under the heaven will render homage to them,
Then the people would automatically be equally sufficient without being directed.
It was named after the initiation of regulations, when names were given,
Then one will know how to rest.
To know how to stop will not reach a perilous end.
The application of Dao to the world is like the relation of oceans to rivers.

up

33

One who knows others is intelligent.
One who knows himself is enlightened.
One who overcomes others has power.
One who disciplines himself has will power.
One who knows satisfaction is rich.
One who overcomes himself is strong.
One who does not lose one's personality, endures.
One who is dead and never forgotten has longevity.

up

34

How all-pervading the superior Dao is!
It could be on the left, it could be on the right.
Upon it the life of all things depends and it does not deny anyone.
It accomplishes merits but it does not possess fame.
It shields and nourishes All Things but it does not lord over them.
It may be called the Superior.
Hence, a Sage ruler never wishes to be superior.
Therefore he eventually became superior.

up

35

He who holds fast to the superior model, the whole world may follow him without ado.
They follow him without harm, but with comfort, equality and prosperity.
Musical temptation and food's flavor can stop a traveler on the road.
When Dao is tasted by mouth, it is mild and without flavor.
When it is looked at, it cannot be entirely seen;
when it is listened to, it cannot be entirely heard;
and when it is taken, it cannot be eaten.

up

36

What is to be contracted may need to be expanded;
what is to be weakened may need to be strengthened;
what is to be reduced may need to be increased;
and what is to be reformed may need to be impaired.
This is called "Starting enlightenment".
A fish cannot live out of water.
A country with deadly weapons should never demonstrate them before others.

up

37

The eternity of Dao contrives nothing, yet it provides everything.
If rulers can cling to it - Dao,
All Things will transform (change) themselves.
Any artificial desire occurring during the transformation, shall be suppressed by the nameless "Purity" (Pure Matter).
Nameless "Purity" (Pure Matter) will do away with artificial desires.
When artificial desires have been done away with, all peoples will be at peace and the world order will be established automatically.

up

38

When conduct is of high virtue, one is unconscious of virtue, thus he can accomplish virtue.
When conduct is of low virtue, one is conscious of virtue, thus he cannot accomplish virtue.
High virtue does not contrive and has no desire for gain.
Low virtue also does not contrive but has desire for gain.
High benevolence does contrive yet it has no desire for gain.
High righteousness does contrive and also has desire for gain.
High ritual does not only contrive and desire, but is also violent:
if it finds no response at all, it resorts to fighting its way out with stretched arms.
Hence when Dao is losing, then its virtues are losing.
When virtues are losing, benevolence is encouraged.
When benevolence is losing, the righteousness is encouraged.
When righteousness is losing, then rituals are encouraged.
Rituals stand for the lack of loyalty and reliability and are the beginning of disorder.
Divination stands for the emotional performance of Dao and is the beginning of stupidity.
Therefore the superior man prefers to possess few things rather than an abundance, to have insight rather than to see superficially.
Thus he prefers insight to superficiality.

up

39

Since the beginning of Heaven and Earth, there were things attaining balance:
through attaining balance, Heavens equilibrated;
through attaining balance, the Earth became secure;
through attaining balance, minds became calm;
through attaining balance, valleys became capacious;
through attaining balance, All Things became productive;
through attaining balance, rulers achieved justice throughout the world.
Were the heavens are not equilibrated, they might collapse;
were the Earth not secure, it might quake to bits;
were minds not calm, they might be disrupted;
were valleys not capacious, they might dry up;
were All Things non-productive, they might become extinct;
were rulers not obtaining justice throughout the world, they might fall.
Hence, the rulers established the rule based on the ruled;
and the highness was built upon the foundation of the lowness.
When rulers called themselves "orphans", "widows" and "indigents" reminds that they established the rule according to the needs of the ruled.
Did they not?
Thus frequent flattery becomes no flattery.
Therefore, a perfect gentleman has no excessive desires:
He is smooth like smooth jade!
He is solid like solid rock!

up

40

To return is to complete the movement - change.
To be tender is a virtue of Dao.
Universe (Heaven and Earth) and All Things were given birth by Existence.
Existence was given birth by Unknown-Existence.

up

41

The superior scholar hears of Dao, he may devote himself to it and follow it;
the average scholar hears of Dao, he sometimes understands it and sometimes he ignores it;
and the inferior scholar hears of Dao, he greatly ridicules it.
If it is not superior, it would not be Dao.
Thus, there are sayings in the Book of Establishment:
Enlightened Dao looks as if obscured;
advanced Dao looks as if retreating and the smooth way of Dao looks as if rugged;
high virtue looks as if common;
the superior distinction may seem indistinct;
abundant virtue looks as if insufficient;
vigorous virtue looks as if easy-going and pure virtue looks as if stupidity.
The superior square may seem to be cornerless.
The superior personality may be established late.
The superior sound may have no way to be heard.
The superior model may seem to be insignificant.
The function of Dao has no name.
It is Dao - the impartial law of nature that knows best how to help and accomplish.

up

42

Dao gave birth to One - Existence: Heaven;
One gave birth to Two - Coexistence: Heaven and Earth;
Two gave birth to Three: Heaven, Earth and Life;
and Three gave birth to All Things.
All Things are sustained by Yin - the inactive cosmic gas, and are embraced by Yang - the active cosmic gas.
To produce these gases into orderly use is to harmonize them.
What the people hate are: "orphanhood", "widowhood" and "indigence".
Yet these terms are used as designations by rulers.
Materialistically, one may gain by losing,
Similarly, one may lose by gaining.
What people preach I also preach.
Then I shall be the master of preaching.
A violent person cannot die a natural death.

up

43

The world's softest can over-run the world's hardest.
It comes from the unknown (non-existence) and it enters no space.
From this we know how advantageous is non-interference!
Thus, education by non-preaching and the policy of non-interference have merits with which nothing under heaven can compare.

up

44

Between your fame and yourself, which is closer to you?
Between yourself and your wealth, which is more dear to you?
Between gain and loss, which is more of a burden to you?
Thus, excessive lust will cost one a great deal in the end.
Excessive wealth will make one suffer a heavy loss.
One who knows satisfaction will not be disgraced.
One who knows when to stop will not reach a perilous end.
Then he can rule everywhere and forever.

up

45

The superior perfection may seem imperfect.
Because of its vast capacity, its function is never exhausted.
Because of its vast capacity, its function is never limited.
The superior fulness may seem empty.
The superior straightness may look like crookedness.
The superior skill may appear clumsy.
The superior eloquence may sound like stammering.
Inaction overcomes restlessness.
Inaction overcomes impulsiveness.
Quiescence overcomes irritation.
He kept purity and tranquility to be the model of the world.

up

46

When the world was under the rule of Dao, horses were distributed to cultivate farms.
When the world was without the rule of Dao, horses were armed and brought to battlefields.
No fault if greater than excessive desire.
No calamity is greater than to know no satisfaction.
No sin is greater than excessive gain.
To know satisfaction is to be always satisfied.

up

47

Without leaving the door one may know the course of the world.
Without looking through the window one may see the law of nature.
The maximum extreme possesses a minimum of knowledge.
Hence a sage ruler knew without traveling;
designated without seeing;
and accomplished without interfering.

up

48

To learn daily will increase desires.
To follow Dao will daily reduce desires.
Reduce and reduce desires until there is no coveting.
Dao contrives nothing yet it provides everything.
Therefore to lead the world is to be persistently with no intervention.
If there is any intervention, it will be impossible to lead the world.

up

49

The sage ruler had no prejudice of his own.
He made his mind to be based on the mind of the people.
If it was perfect, he liked it;
if it was not perfect, he also liked it:
then perfection was attained.
If it was true, he understood it;
if it was not true, he also understood it:
then truth was attained.
Indifferently, indifferently sage rulers were in the world.
Effortlessly, effortlessly they ruled the world.
The people turned their eyes and ears toward them.
Sage rulers treated all people like their own children.

up

50

Throughout human life, from birth to death:
There are one third who die naturally;
There are one third who die from disease;
And the other one third who die by speeding to death.
For what reasons have they done so?
Because they live by overdrawing upon their lives heavily.
As I used to hear that:
"One who takes good care of his life will not meet a rhinoceros or a tiger when he is traveling on land.
He does not need to wear armour or carry weapons when he is leading an army."
The rhinoceros finds no place to insert its horn.
The tiger finds no place to put its claws.
Weapons of war find no place to thrust their blades.
For what reasons?
Because one never lets himself be in a vulnerable situation.

up

51

Dao gives birth to All Things.
Its virtue nourishes them.
Its Matter forms them, and its Forces perfect them.
Thus among All Things there is none which does not esteem Dao and envy its virtues.
To esteem Dao and envy its Virtues do not take any order whatever, but follow the eternity of Nature.
Since Dao gives life;
and its virtues nourish it, grow it, cultivate it, accomplish it, mature it, nurse it, and protect it.
It produces All Things but it does not possess them.
It provides everything for them but it does not take anything from them.
It leads them but does not lord over them.
It is called "the Profound Virtue".

up

52

The universe has its mother - Dao,
The world has its mother - the universe.
As we already know the mother of the universe - Dao, we should know how to rule her son - the world.
As we already know her son - the world, we should know how to follow his mother - Dao.
By so doing, there will be no discontinuation of life even though a human body will die.
Close the entrances to attractions and control the excess of desires, till the end of life, there will be no effort to work.
Open the entrances to attractions, multiply excess of desires, till the end of life, there will be no completion of work.
One who knows a limited truth is intelligent.
To be gentle is to be strengthened.
One who uses his bright senses and recovers his enlightenment will not let himself be in a perilous situation.
This is called the awareness of eternity.

up

53

If I have just a little wisdom to lead me to approach the superior way of Dao, I fear that I may stray from it.
The superior way of Dao is plain and yet man prefers devious paths.
When government officers are very neglected;
farm lands are very weedy;
public granaries are very empty;
yet, brilliant clothes are displayed;
sharp swords are carried;
and excessive food and drinks are over used, and personal wealth and treasures are abundant.
This is called "Exhibition of Robbery".
Really it is aberration of Dao!

up

54

What is perfectly planted will not be uprooted.
What is perfectly held will not slip away.
Through generations the family's memorial service will not be discontinued.
Thus,
by cultivating Dao in a person, virtues become manifest;
by cultivating Dao in a family, virtues become abundant;
by cultivating Dao in the community, virtues become enduring;
by cultivating Dao in a country, virtues become flourishing;
and by cultivating Dao in the world, virtues become universal.
Thus,
by taking care of one's self, one takes care of others;
by taking care of one's family, one takes care of others' families;
by taking care of one's own community, one takes care of others' communities;
by taking care of one's own country, one takes care of others' countries;
and by taking care of the world, one takes care of the universe.
How do we know in what way the world should be ruled?
Through this.

up

55

The inherited abundance of tender virtues is comparable to a new-born baby:
the poisonous insects may not sting him;
the fierce animals may not touch him;
and birds of prey may not snatch him.
His bones are soft and his muscles are tender, yet, he can hold firm.
It is like an infant who has the organ of reproduction but does not know its function.
This is the perfection of natural vitality.
It is like an infant who cries all day without growing hoarse.
This is the perfection of natural harmony.
To comprehend this harmony is to know the eternal function of Dao.
One who knows the eternities is enlightened.
One who overdoes his living is unlucky.
One whose will overcomes his temper is strong.
A matured living body will soon grow old.
These are called "the aberration of Dao".
The aberration of Dao leads to early extinction.

up

56

One who knows may not preach.
One who preaches may not know.
Close the entrances to attractions and control the excess of desires.
It blunts all sharpness.
It settles all disputes.
It harmonizes all lights.
It unites all lands.
They are the "Profound Similarities" of Dao.
Thus,
It cannot be involved, nor can it be ignored.
It cannot be utilized, nor can it be harmed.
It cannot be honored, nor can it be disgraced.
Thus, it is cherished by all things under the heaven.

up

57

By positive policy rule the kingdom, by negative strategy conduct the war and by unselfish design lead the world.
How do we know that is so?
By this:
Where there were more taboos and inhibitions in the country, the general public was getting poorer and poorer.
Where there were more new tools and techniques in the hands of certain people, there were more confusions and injustices in the government.
The more laws and decrees were issued, the more robbers and crooks were propagated.
Thus a Sage ruler said:
"If I do not interfere, the people will cultivate themselves naturally.
If I love to be inactive, the people will govern themselves automatically.
If I do not look for display, the people will enrich themselves automatically.
If I have no excessive desires, the people will return themselves to the Pure Matter naturally.
If I have no emotional needs, the people will tranquilize themselves automatically."

up

58

Modest, and modest will be the government, then prosperous, and prosperous will be the people!
Shrewd will be the government, then discontented, and discontented will be the people!
Catastrophe rests upon fortune.
Fortune underlies catastrophe.
Who knows the ultimate answers?
What is normal soon becomes abnormal.
What is auspicious soon becomes ominous.
Do away with dogmatism!
Indeed, it is a long, long time ago since Man lost his way of Dao!
Therefore, a Sage is:
solidly square but has no sharp corners;
purely austere but not harmful;
straightly upright but not offensive;
humbly modest but not submissive;
and harmoniously bright but not dazzling.

up

59

To rule the people and serve the world there is nothing better than to follow the model of nature.
To follow the model of nature is to be the early appreciation of Dao.
To be the early appreciation of Dao is to give emphasis to the accumulation of Virtues.
To give emphasis to the accumulation of Virtues there is nothing that cannot be overcome.
When one has nothing that cannot be overcome, then nobody knows his limit.
When nobody knows his limit, then he may have a kingdom to rule.
When one has a kingdom to rule, he may mother (rule) the world.
He may rule everywhere and forever.
This is called the way of deepening the root;
consolidating the sprout;
prolonging the life;
and enduring the rule.

up

60

To rule a big country should be so simple like cooking small fish.
When the world rule is approaching Dao:
The Ghost and Spirit will not necessarily be divine.
It is not that the Ghost and Spirit will not necessarily be divine but the divine will not be utilized to threaten people with harm.
Not only the divine should not threaten people with harm, the Sage ruler should not threaten people with harm either.
When those two (state and religion) do no harm to each other, both will achieve the same goal - Return to Nature.

up

61

To conduct a policy of a large country should be like a valley staying in the lower ground.
To conduct international affairs the best policy, is to be humble and non-aggressive (inactive).
Everyplace under the sun, all females outsmart the males by inaction.
Be inactive and be humble.
Therefore, the large country which is humble before the small country will lead the small country.
The small country which is humble before the large country will please the large country.
Thus sometimes a country unites the world by being humble and sometimes a country becomes humble in order to unite the world.
What a great country wants is no more than to lead more people.
What the small country wants is no more than to serve others.
To let both of them get what they want is simply to insure that the large country be humble.

up

62

Dao is the wonder of All Things.
Perfection is what people like.
Imperfection is what people dislike.
Beautiful words may be used for markets.
Beautiful deeds may be used for pride.
If a person is imperfect why should he be ignored?
Hence, the "Son of Heaven" was installed and the three dukes (Ministers) were appointed,
Even though one has abundant jade and wealth to establish war horses and chariots, it is not as good as to consolidate and advance Dao.
For what reasons did the ancients bless this Dao?
Is it not said that:
"Whatever is prayed for is obtained.
Whoever has sin is forgiven."?
Thus Dao becomes the blessing of the world.

up

63

Do not interfere;
prepare the unprepared;
and think the unthinkable.
No matter whether it is great or small, whether it is much or little, hatred must be met with love.
Therefore, resolve the difficulty when it is easy.
Change the graveness when it is insignificant.
A difficult world affair must be solved when it is still easy.
A grave world situation must be changed when it is insignificant.
However, the Sage ruler never wishes himself to be superior, therefore he eventually becomes superior.
Hence an easy promise must result in promise-breaking.
Frequent easy-goings meet more difficulties.
A Sage was always aware of difficulties, thus he met no difficulty at last.

up

64

What is still at rest is easy to maintain.
What is still insignificant is easy to dispose of.
What is still fragile is easily shattered.
What is still not yet begun is easy to plan.
Action should be taken before the emergency occurs.
Measures should be taken before confusion is formed.
A large tree, so large arms can hardly go around, was grown from a tiny seed.
A tall tower, of nine stories height, was built first with a handful of dirt.
A long journey of a thousand miles can be finished by moving feet.
One who intervenes will be defeated.
One who grasps the world will lose it.
So the Sage ruler does not intervene, thus he does not fail.
He does not grasp, thus he never loses.
Sometimes people fail to reach the end when they are already on the verge of success.
A Sage was as cautious at the end as in the beginning, so he could avoid failure.
Thus a Sage ruler never desired what should not be desired, such as he never cherished rare goods.
He did not experience what should not be experienced, such as he never repeated the faults of others.
It gives supplementary help to the nature of All Things, and yet it dares not to assert itself.

up

65

The perfect ruler of ancient times did not teach the people to be intelligent, but rather taught them to be simple,
Because the difficulty of ruling people is always due to their being too intelligent.
Thus to use intelligence and skills to rule a country is robbing the country;
not to use intelligence and skills to rule a country is blessing the country.
By knowing these two - Dao and virtues, both of them are the models of Nature.
By constantly following the models is called the "Profound Virtues".
The Incomprehensive is unfathomable and far-reaching.
It (Change) brings all things to return (from the extreme) until perfect harmony - "Grand Concord" is reached.

up

66

Oceans and rivers can be the destinations of a hundred waters because the former place themselves just lower than the latter, thus they can be the destinations of a hundred waters.
Hence if one wishes to be on top of others he must place himself lower than others;
If he wishes to lead others he must put his own interest behind others.
Hence, when a Sage ruler was on top of others, yet, they did not feel pressure;
when he was in front of others, still, they did not feel hurt.
And the whole world was glad to have him on top, and did not weary of him.
Because of non-struggle, therefore, there is nothing under heaven which can struggle with him.

up

67

All in the world may think that Dao is unlike to be so superior, that nothing in the world can compare to it.
If it were comparable to anything, it would be inferior.
If it is not superior, it would not be Dao.
I have three treasured strategies to which I hold fast and embrace them all:
the first is Mercy;
the second is Economy of Force;
and the third is Dare Not to Take Initiative Before the World.
Because of Mercy, one can be courageous.
Because of Economy of Force, one can have superior force.
Because of Dare Not To Take Initiative Before the World, one can be the master of instruments.
Alas!
Nowadays, rulers want to be brave without being merciful;
want to have superior force without knowing economy of force;
and want to take initiative without being able to be resistant.
They will surely die in the war.
Mercy helps one to win when on the offensive;
to consolidate when on the defensive.
If one guides oneself by mercy Heavens will protect him.

up

68

In the ancient times:
The perfect warriors were not warlike.
The perfect fighters were not angry.
The perfect winners were not aggressive and the perfect diplomats were humble before the world.
This is called the practice of the virtue of non-struggle.
This is called the use of the wisdom of benevolence.
This is called to comply with the ultimate Nature.

up

69

The Conduct of War has this to say:
"I dare not take the initiative but rather to be resistant.
I dare not advance an inch but rather I withdraw a foot."
So that, engage the enemy without advancing.
Drive out the enemy without arms.
Subdue the enemy without battle.
Take the enemy with invincibility.
No fault is greater than to underestimate the enemy:
To underestimate the enemy is to destroy all my treasured principles.
When an army of resistance engages, the mournful one - the army of resistance, wins.

up

70

My teaching is very easy to be understood and very easy to be followed,
Yet very few people in the world can understand and follow it.
My teaching is to trace the origin of all things and my service is to serve the fundamentals of Nature.
If one does not understand Nature, surely, he cannot understand me.
If I am known only by a few, I feel envious of it.
Therefore, the Sage ruler even wore coarse clothes but embraced his jadelike personality.

up

71

One who knows the unknown is a high type of man.
One who does not know the known is at fault.
Thus a Sage was not at fault because he was aware of faults.

up

72

People are not afraid of punishment, yet capital punishment is enforced.
Do not force people into moving.
Do not weary people of living.
Hence, only non-interference prevents people from becoming weary.
Therefore, Sage rulers were aware of self but not self-displaying;
self-respecting but not self-exalting.
He eliminated the former and supplied the later.

up

73

The courage of one daring to be aggressive will eventually kill his life.
The courage of one not daring to be aggressive will eventually ensure his life.
Between these two kinds of courage we know which one is good and which one is harmful.
Who knows the reason why?
Because it is hated by nature.
The law of Nature does not strive, yet achieves a perfect victory.
It does not use words, yet it is perfectly convincing.
It receives no call, yet it automatically responds.
It is plain and unnoticed, yet it is skillfully planned.
It covers every place all the time like a heavenly net, it seems to be wide meshed, yet it does not let anything slip away.

up

74

When people are no longer afraid of death, how can they be disciplined by death?
And if someone likes to be abnormal he may be arrested and punished, then who else would dare to be abnormal?
Since the one to kill is killed, a great professional killer is like a great professional chopper whose hands are subject to be hurt.

up

75

The hunger of people is caused by the ruler who levies too many taxes.
Thus they are hungry.
The difficulty of ruling people is due to the fact that the ruler interferes.
Thus they are difficult to rule.
The reason people take life lightly is because they live by overdrawing their lives heavily.
Therefore, they take life lightly.
Hence, only the one who has not overdone his living knows his life better.

up

76

A living person is gentle and tender, while a dying person is rigid and hard.
A living plant is gentle and tender, while a dying plant is dry and withered.
Thus, one who is rigid and hard is on the way to die.
One who is gentle and tender is on the way to live.
Thus, a strong army will soon be annihilated.
A hard stick of wood will soon be broken.
A piece of hard leather will soon be split.
Teeth are stronger than lips, yet the teeth decay first.
Therefore, hardness and strength are inferior, gentleness and tenderness are superior.

up

77

Is not the law of Nature like aiming with a bow?
It brings down the high and lifts up the low;
reduces the excessive, drawing strength;
and increases insufficient, drawing strength.
So that the law of Nature is to diminish the excess and supply the want.
But the way of Man is not so:
He robs the poor and serves the rich!
Who can give his excessive possessions to serve the world?
The man who possesses Dao.
Thus a Sage ruler provided everything but did not take anything.
He accomplished deeds but did not claim them.
That is, he did not display his sagacity.

up

78

Under heaven, there is nothing as soft as water, yet it can penetrate the hard;
while the strong things cannot overcome it.
Be not easy-going!
Thus, weakness overcomes strength and softness overcomes hardness.
Very few people in the world can understand and follow it.
Therefore, the Sage rulers said:
"One whose capacity can sustain blame from the whole kingdom, can be the ruler of the kingdom.
One whose capacity can bear the calamities of the world, can be the ruler of world."
Positive advice may use the opposite way.

up

79

When a great hatred is reconciled there must be some hatred remaining.
How can this be made into perfection?
Thus, the Sage ruler granted rights to the people and required no repayment from them.
Hence, the office of a virtuous ruler is established for welfare of the people;
while the office of a virtueless ruler is established for taxation of the people.
The law of Nature is impartial yet it is always with the good man.

up

80

Prefer to rule a small kingdom with few people.
Even though there are abundant resources, prefer to use the one tenth or one hundredth.
Care only for their life and refrain from moving far away, even though there were war ships and chariots ready but no place to use them;
and there were arms and weapons ready but no front to deploy them.
He led them to a simple life even by use of "Knotted Cords" again,
To be contented with their foods, be beautiful with their clothes, be satisfied with their homes and be happy with their customs.
The neighboring countries are within sight of each other;
the voices of cocks and dogs were heard from both sides.
Yet the people might grow old and die before they would cross territories of each other.

up

81

Truth is not beautiful;
and beauty is not true.
One who is right may not argue;
and one who argues may not be right.
One who knows the special may not know the general;
and one who knows the general may not know the special.
Thus, a Sage ruler never concentrated his wealth:
What has been done for others makes him feel even better himself.
What has been distributed to others makes him feel richer himself.
Dao of Nature is to benefit and is not to injure.
Dao of a Sage ruler is to serve, and is not aggressive.